Ischemia/Reperfusion
Theodore Kalogeris1, Christopher P. Baines1,2,3, Maike Krenz1,2, and Ronald J. Korthuis*,1,2
1Department of Medical Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Missouri School of Medicine, 
Columbia, Missouri, USA
2Dalton Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA
3Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Missouri College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Columbia, Missouri, USA
Abstract
Ischemic disorders, such as myocardial infarction, stroke, and peripheral vascular disease, are the 
most common causes of debilitating disease and death in westernized cultures. The extent of tissue 
injury relates directly to the extent of blood flow reduction and to the length of the ischemic 
period, which influence the levels to which cellular ATP and intracellular pH are reduced. By 
impairing ATPase-dependent ion transport, ischemia causes intracellular and mitochondrial 
calcium levels to increase (calcium overload). Cell volume regulatory mechanisms are also 
disrupted by the lack of ATP, which can induce lysis of organelle and plasma membranes. 
Reperfusion, although required to salvage oxygen-starved tissues, produces paradoxical tissue 
responses that fuel the production of reactive oxygen species (oxygen paradox), sequestration of 
proinflammatory immunocytes in ischemic tissues, endoplasmic reticulum stress, and development 
of postischemic capillary no-reflow, which amplify tissue injury. These pathologic events 
culminate in opening of mitochondrial permeability transition pores as a common end-effector of 
ischemia/reperfusion (I/R)-induced cell lysis and death. Emerging concepts include the influence 
of the intestinal microbiome, fetal programming, epigenetic changes, and microparticles in the 
pathogenesis of I/R. The overall goal of this review is to describe these and other mechanisms that 
contribute to I/R injury. Because so many different deleterious events participate in I/R, it is clear 
that therapeutic approaches will be effective only when multiple pathologic processes are targeted. 
In addition, the translational significance of I/R research will be enhanced by much wider use of 
animal models that incorporate the complicating effects of risk factors for cardiovascular disease.
Introduction
Although myocardial necrosis and severe coronary atherosclerotic disease were recognized 
in autopsies performed in the 1800s, thrombi were not typically observed in the coronary 
arteries supplying the infarcted region of the myocardium. The latter observation, coupled 
with the fact that the extent of coronary atherosclerosis was highly variable in the autopsied 
hearts, made clinicians of this era reluctant to conclude that an interruption of the arterial 
inflow was a causative factor in myocardial infarction (380). Even though experimental 
*Correspondence to korthuisr@health.missouri.edu. 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Published in final edited form as:
Compr Physiol. ; 7(1): 113–170. doi:10.1002/cphy.c160006.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
occlusion of major coronary arteries was shown to produce myocardial infarction in the 
affected regions of dog hearts in the 1880s, it was not until 100 years later, when DeWood 
and co-workers (191) demonstrated that patients with early signs of myocardial infarction 
almost always presented with an thrombotic occlusion of the artery supplying the affected 
region of their hearts. Importantly, thrombolysis not only restored arterial inflow in these 
catheterized patients, many of the clinical and electrocardiographics signs of developing 
infarcts were also reversed. These studies not only established that coronary ischemia was 
indeed a causative factor inmyocardial infarction but also suggested that endothelial 
fibrinolysins dissolved the clot that caused the infarction in autopsied patients who died 24 h 
after the onset of symptoms.
Well before the advent of thrombolytic therapy, it was discovered that reestablishing the 
blood supply, which is required to salvage previously ischemic tissue that had not progressed 
to irreversible injury, could paradoxically exacerbate tissue injury. First suggested by 
Jennings et al. (382) in 1960, the existence of reperfusion injury has been the subject of 
intense debate, with some investigators suggesting that reperfusion acts to worsen damage 
already sustained by cells exposed to ischemia (59, 482). This controversy relates to the 
inability to determine necrotic progress during the transition from tissue ischemia to 
reperfusion. However, the ability of interventions initiated when the blood supply is 
reestablished to reduce cellular damage and infarct size to levels below the protection 
afforded by reperfusion alone strongly supports the concept of lethal reperfusion injury (405, 
881).
Recognition that pathologic events occurring during both ischemia and reperfusion 
contribute to tissue injury led to accelerated efforts to identify the mechanisms of ischemia/
reperfusion (I/R) injury, with the hope for identifying novel treatments that might limit 
injury induced by the reduction in blood flow and/or damage produced iatrogenically by 
reperfusion. A remarkable series of impressive findings have been reported in the past 40 
years, owing to a rapidly growing repertoire of sophisticated new techniques. From this 
work, it is now clear that ischemia impairs ATPase-dependent ion transport and disrupts cell 
volume regulatory mechanisms, which can lead to lysis of organelle and plasma membranes. 
In addition, new work has uncovered multiple death modalities that contribute to I/R-
induced cell death, many of which occur by programmed sequences of events that may be 
amenable to pharmacologic intervention. Moreover, reperfusion produces paradoxical tissue 
responses that fuel the production of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species and promotes 
sequestration of proinflammatory immunocytes in ischemic tissues, endoplasmic reticulum 
stress, and development of postischemic capillary no-reflow, which amplify tissue injury. 
The aforementioned pathologic events culminate in opening of mitochondrial permeability 
transition pores (MPTPs) as a common end-effector of I/R-induced cell lysis and death. In 
addition to these mechanisms, much recent attention has focused on the influence of the 
intestinal microbiome, fetal exposure to stressors, epigenetic alterations in gene expression, 
proteolytic digestion products, and microparticles in the pathogenesis of I/R. In this review, 
we will summarize our current understanding of this plethora of pathologic contributors to 
the genesis of I/R injury, but will focus most of our attention on the reperfusion component 
of total tissue injury, since this segment is the most amenable to therapeutic intervention.
Kalogeris et al.
Page 2
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
General Characteristics of Ischemia/Reperfusion
Both the degree to which blood flow is reduced and length of the ischemic period influence 
the extent of cell dysfunction, injury, and/or death (2, 113, 380, 405) (Fig. 1). This fact 
underscores the importance of rapid blood flow restoration as the mainstay of all therapies to 
limit ischemic injury. In this regard, it is important to note different organ systems display 
differential vulnerability to ischemia. Furthermore, in any given organ, cells can survive 
short periods of ischemia (duration dependent on the organ), with a variable proportion of 
those cells able to withstand longer ischemic bouts than others. This is termed reversible 
injury. With increasing durations of ischemia, a growing number of cells die, sustaining 
injuries that are irreversible and are characterized by loss of structural integrity in affected 
tissues.
It now seems clear that recanalization of occluded vessels, although necessary to reestablish 
oxygen and nutrient delivery necessary for cell function and for abstraction of cellular 
metabolites from the ischemic region, can provoke activation of deleterious processes that 
damage previously unaffected cells and also exacerbate injury due to ischemia per se. 
However, the situation is further complicated by metabolite/mediator transit into the blood 
draining reperfused tissues, which then travel to distant organs via the bloodstream to 
produce injury. Finally, short bouts of I/R (ischemic conditioning), which were long thought 
of as innocuous, are now recognized to activate cell survival programs that allow tissues to 
better withstand the onslaught of pathogenetic events invoked by lethal I/R. Thus, the 
response to I/R is bimodal, with short bouts conferring cardioprotection, while longer 
periods provoke cell dysfunction and death. These issues will be discussed in greater detail 
later.
Mechanistically distinct pathologic processes are invoked during the phases of ischemia 
and reperfusion
When the blood supply is reduced secondary to thrombosis, cells switch to anaerobic 
metabolism resulting in reductions in cell pH and ATP production (Fig. 1). As a 
consequence, the Na+/H+ exchanger (NHE) extrudes accumulating hydrogen ions in 
exchange for sodium ions (683). The lack of oxygen delivery forces cells to manufacture 
ATP anaerobically but this production occurs at levels insufficient to maintain the function 
of ATPases (e.g., Na+/K+ ATPase). This results in cellular calcium overload as a 
consequence of reduced active Ca++ reuptake into the endoplasmic reticulum and ATPase-
dependent Ca++ efflux across the plasmalemma. Disruption of mitochondrial architecture 
occurs simultaneously, with prominent features being swelling, disorganized cristae, and the 
appearance of fuzzy osmophilic densities in the matrix space. In addition, mitochondrial 
membrane potential is dissipated secondary to opening of mitochondrial PTPs and inner 
membrane anion channels, which further impairs ATP production. In the heart, 
hypercontracture and contracture band necrosis are produced by myofibrillar damage 
secondary to ischemia-induced activation of intracellular proteases (e.g., calpains). 
Disruption of the plasma membrane as well as subcellular organelle membranes, secondary 
to swelling and altered ion movements allows intracellular components to leak into the 
extracellular fluid and disrupts energy metabolism (Fig. 1). Damage to capillary endothelial 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 3
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
cells in the ischemic region occurs on a slower time scale, reflecting their lower requirement 
for energy. However, these cells swell during ischemia thereby reducing capillary lumenal 
diameter, which facilitates impaction of neutrophils in these microvessels. Development of 
this capillary no-reflow phenomenon worsens during reperfusion, limiting the delivery of 
arterial blood and pharmacologic agents into the ischemic region as well as preventing 
washout of accumulating metabolic wastes. In the brain, ischemia-induced contraction of 
pericytes surrounding microvessels also contributes to no-reflow. Microvascular 
permeability changes also occur as a consequence of I/R, leading to edema formation and 
increased interstitial fluid pressure. Edema formation increases the diffusion distance for 
oxygen and nutrients while the rise in tissue pressure contributes to no-reflow by physically 
compressing microvessels. The latter mechanism is especially important for organs that 
cannot readily increase their interstitial fluid spaces such as the brain, kidneys, and specific 
skeletal muscles where expansion is limited by the cranial vault, renal capsule, or 
encasement in tight fascial sheaths, respectively.
Prompt restoration of blood flow removes hydrogen ions that accumulated in the 
extracellular space during ischemia and also provides oxygen and substrates required for 
aerobic ATP generation. However, as first reported by Jennings et al. (380, 382) over 50 
years ago, reperfusion is not without peril. In this landmark study, it was noted that 
reperfusion accelerated the development of myocardial necrosis. This led to the concept that 
reperfusion was not entirely beneficial, but rather produced injury by pathologic events 
associated with reestablishing the blood supply that had not occurred during the preceding 
ischemic period. Indeed, subsequent work showed that cell death can continue for up to 3 
days after blood flow is restored to ischemic tissues (909, 915). Perhaps the strongest 
support for the reperfusion injury concept was provided by a large number of studies 
showing that interventions, given only at the time of reperfusion, attenuated, or abolished 
damage in previously ischemic tissues (881).
As depicted in Figure 1, it is now clear that a large number of pathologic processes underlie 
reperfusion injury. First, molecular oxygen is reintroduced to the tissues via arterial blood 
flowing into the previously ischemic tissue, thereby providing the missing substrate for 
generation of cytotoxic reactive oxygen species. Defects in the plasma membrane, 
endoplasmic reticulum, and mitochondria allow calcium to accumulate (calcium overload) in 
the cytosol and mitochondria, with rapid formation of hydroxyapatite crystals in the latter. 
The opening of the mPTP, endothelial dysfunction, appearance of a prothrombogenic 
phenotype, development of capillary no-reflow, and pronounced inflammatory responses 
also play major roles in the development of reperfusion injury (881). Understanding these 
mechanistically distinct pathologic processes that are invoked during ischemia and 
reperfusion allows for development of targeted therapies to reduce I/R injury. Moreover, 
such treatment modalities may prolong the ischemic time that a tissue can withstand before 
irreversible injury occurs (Fig. 2), thereby increasing the temporal window for organ 
transplantation, cardiopulmonary bypass, and surgical procedures to be conducted in a 
bloodless field.
Kalogeris et al.
Page 4
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Tissue responses to I/R are bimodal
Every tissue and organ is able to endure short interruptions in their blood supply without 
detectable deficits in function or cellular damage (Fig. 2). However, once the duration of 
ischemia exceeds a critical level, which varies by cell type and organ, the end-result is 
injury, perturbed function, and/or cell death. Thus, the extent of tissue injury, dysfunction 
and cell death varies in accord with the duration of ischemia. As a consequence, it is 
essential to reestablish the blood supply as soon as is possible after the onset of ischemia to 
limit the progression in severity of cell injury.
It was long thought that responses to ischemia were inconsequential if the duration was 
short, while extending ischemic times resulted in progressive increases in the extent of cell 
injury and reductions in tissue function. However, in 1986, this view was altered by the 
discovery that prior exposure of the heart to intermittent short bouts of ischemia and 
reperfusion (ischemic preconditioning), at durations (<5 min) previously thought to be 
without effect, exerted powerful infarct-sparing effects in hearts subsequently exposed to 
prolonged reductions in coronary blood flow (576). This breakthrough discovery provided 
the first evidence that tissue responses to ischemia are not invariably deleterious, but are 
actually bimodal (Fig. 3). That is, longer periods of ischemia induce cell dysfunction and/or 
death that is exacerbated by reperfusion, while short cycles of conditioning ischemia appear 
to activate intrinsic cell-survival programs that render tissues resistant to the deleterious 
effects invoked by subsequent exposure to prolonged ischemia followed by reperfusion (Fig. 
3). This seminal discovery led to an explosion of interest aimed at identifying the underlying 
mechanisms, which in turn might be exploited to identify new treatment modalities to reduce 
negative outcomes after adverse ischemic events.
Moderate I/R can induce myocardial stunning or hibernation
It was once thought that persistent myocardial contractile dysfunction resulted only after 
irreversible cellular damage occurred. However, in the heart (and perhaps other tissues), 
mechanical abnormalities can persist after restoration of coronary blood flow to normal or 
near normal levels in the absence of permanent damage if the ischemic phase is moderate 
(84, 184, 185) (Fig. 3). Indeed, it does not appear that myocardial stunning is caused by a 
primary deficit in reperfusion, but rather results from processes initiated by reestablishing 
the blood supply. One of the most important events appears to be related to reactive oxygen 
species formation (oxygen paradox). In addition, decreased responsiveness of contractile 
elements to calcium occurs in the face of transient calcium overload (calcium paradox). 
Calpain-induced proteolysis of myofibrils contributes to depressed contractile function, 
while rapid restoration of extracellular pH (pH paradox) leads to altered membrane ion 
channel activity. It has been proposed that stunning-induced contractile deficits may enhance 
the likelihood of cell survival by limiting the impact of the harsh ischemic milieu on 
myocyte injury progression toward irreversible damage during reperfusion (84, 184, 185).
Another type of adaptive response that may limit myocardial injury and death in hearts 
exposed to prolonged moderate or repetitive intermittent ischemia is adoption of a glycolytic 
phenotype by ischemic myocytes, reminiscent of the metabolic profile in neonatal 
myocardium. This phenomenon is termed myocardial hibernation and is associated with 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 5
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
reduced contractile function and energy demands (184, 185, 725) (Fig. 3). This allows the 
hibernating myocardium to tolerate limited oxygen and nutrient delivery during periods of 
subacute ischemia, thereby preventing irreversible cardiomyocyte injury. When stimulated to 
develop the hibernating phenotype, myocardial cells upregulate the expression of stress and 
angiogenic proteins and reprogram metabolic pathways to reduce energy use. Survival of 
hibernating viable cells in ischemic organs is prolonged by eliminating nonfunctional cells 
via autophagic and apoptotic mechanisms (184, 185, 725).
Tissues and organs differ in their susceptibility to I/R
A fundamentally important concept of I/R is that the magnitude of injury and progression to 
irreversible damage after reperfusion is directly related to the duration of ischemia (2, 100) 
(Fig. 2). As a consequence, restoration of the blood supply as rapidly as possible is a major 
therapeutic goal to limit the extension of damage and cell death. In addition, there are 
common characteristic responses to I/R in all organs, including reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) generation, release of cytokines, chemokines, and other mediators from activated 
endothelium and tissue-resident macrophages and mast cells, endothelial vasodilator 
dysfunction in arterioles and endothelial barrier disruption in capillaries and postcapillary 
venules, neutrophil sequestration and activation, and development of a prothrombogenic 
phenotype. However, tissues and organs differ in their susceptibility to I/R that are due in 
part to variations in basal metabolic requirements amongst the tissues. This provides the 
rationale for the well-known effect of reductions in cellular metabolism secondary to tissue 
cooling to slow the progression of cellular damage in all organs. This approach can be used 
during revascularization procedures and to extend the preservation time for organs destined 
for transplant (57, 770).
Before examining differences amongst organs in their vulnerability to I/R, it is important to 
note that susceptibility of a given organ varies with the species being studied. For example, 
hearts isolated from rabbits, hamsters, ferrets, gerbils, rats, mice, and guinea pigs subjected 
to identical I/R protocols exhibit marked differences in their vulnerability to injury (255). 
Strain differences in susceptibility to I/R have also been reported (49, 50, 101, 199). Thus, 
care must be taken in extrapolating findings in one species or strain to another, let alone 
across all organ systems.
Of the body organs, the brain exhibits the highest sensitivity to ischemia. Although strokes 
can occur secondary to cerebral hemorrhage (which raises interstitial pressure and 
compresses vessels), focal cerebral ischemia (termed ischemic stroke) arising in a specific 
vascular territory secondary to thromboembolic or atherothrombotic vaso-occlusion 
represents the most common clinical presentation. While detectable irreversible damage 
occurs within 20 min after the onset of ischemia (606), the temporal window for initiating 
treatment is longer because cells exhibit differential susceptibility to a given degree of 
ischemia. Thus, significant restoration of function is observed if revascularization (e.g., 
thrombolytic therapy) occurs within 90 min to 4.5 h of the onset of symptoms (79, 313, 
606).
The unique sensitivity of the brain to reductions in its blood supply relates to the fact that 
this organ has the highest metabolic activity per unit weight of any organ (451, 478). 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 6
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Moreover, the brain requires constant delivery of glucose as an absolute requirement for its 
metabolic demands. In addition, the brain has insignificant carbohydrate stores relative to 
other other organs like muscle or liver, and thus cannot operate anaerobically (451, 478). 
Another feature that accounts for the brains’ unique susceptibility to ischemia is the 
significantly lower levels of protective antioxidant enzymes [e.g., superoxide dismutase 
(SOD), catalase, glutathione peroxidase, and heme oxygenase-1] than are present in heart, 
liver, kidney, and lung (5, 171). Brain mitochondria also contain lower levels of cytochrome 
c oxidase than those in other organs, which would contribute to enhanced superoxide 
spillover from the mitochondrial electron transport chain (5). Cerebral cellular membranes 
also have high levels of polyunsaturated fatty acids, making the brain more susceptible to 
oxidative damage (5). Lastly, excessive neuronal release of glutamate and dopamine is 
induced by cerebral I/R, which cause neuronal calcium overload and subsequent cytotoxicity 
owing to ischemia-induced subversion of downstream signaling (142, 478, 618).
Like the brain, the myocardium is also exquisitely sensitive to ischemia. However, the time 
window before the onset of irreversible damage is slightly longer, and begins to appear after 
about 20 min of ischemia in both humans and animal models. As in the brain or any other 
organ, the sooner the affected coronary arteries are reopened, the better for salvage of viable 
cardiomyocytes. Treatment within two hours after the onset of ischemia is desirable (82). 
However, intervention initiated within 12 h has beneficial effects (471). The sensitivity of 
neonatal hearts to I/R depends on age, with the immature myocardium being highly 
susceptible to ischemia (849), whereas enhanced tolerance is seen shortly thereafter (401, 
563, 611, 642, 849).
In the heart, fibrosis occurs after I/R by processes invoked by fibroblasts and mast cells and 
modulated by T cell subsets (249, 651, 844). How mast cells contribute to this process is 
unclear, but fibroblasts transdifferentiate to myofibroblasts, which exuberantly secrete 
matrix proteins to cause fibrosis and myocardial dysfunction. Depending on their 
polarization into Th1 versus Th2 cells, CD4+ T lymphocytes modulate the activity of 
fibroblasts to influence fibrosis and scar formation (651). In contrast, fibrosis does not occur 
in postischemic brain. Instead, I/R results in glial cell activation and release of matrix 
metalloproteases, which degrade extracellular matrix components (196). As a conquence, 
astrocytes and endothelial cells detach from basal lamina, resulting in disruption of the 
blood-brain-barrier. Detachment from the underlying basal lamina also results in glial and 
endothelial cell apoptosis (848).
After the heart and brain, the kidneys are the next most susceptible organ system to 
reductions in their blood supply, with permanent damage not appearing until the duration of 
ischemia exceeds 30 min in humans (549), while even longer ischemic times are tolerable in 
animal models (365). Renal cortical cells are the most sensitive to ischemia because renal 
oxygen levels are highest in this region of the kidney and progressively decrease from the 
outer medulla to the depths of the papillae. After induction of ischemia, outer medullary 
cells transition to anaerobic metabolism, allowing them to better survive in the hypoxic 
environment. Cells in the inner medulla and papillae normally rely on anaerobic glycolysis 
to generate ATP and are thus much less sensitive to ischemia.
Kalogeris et al.
Page 7
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Although the critical time periods of ischemia that the brain, heart, and kidneys can 
withstand before irreversible cell injury occurs are clearly demarcated, the time window for 
cell rescue by successful revascularization is much harder to assess for intestinal ischemia. 
This is due in large part to the difficulty in determining the onset of ischemia because the 
clinical symptoms of intestinal ischemia are often subtle in the early stages. However, in 
animal models, histologic evidence of mucosal injury appears 30 min after the onset of 
ischemia, with more conspicuous villous destruction evident at 60 min (122, 366). After 
revascularization, sloughed villi are rapidly replaced by cell migration (restitution), even 
after 90 min of ischemia (622). In humans, survival after acute mesenteric ischemia is 
approximately 50% if recognized and treated aggressively within 24 h after the onset of 
symptoms. However, progressive reductions in survival occur as this time interval is 
extended (412).
Superior mesenteric artery (SMA) occlusion produces a gradient of ischemia along the 
length of the bowel. The severity of ischemia is greatest in distal portions of the small 
intestine and proximal colon, where the reductions in blood flow are confined to the mucosal 
and submucosal layers and spare the muscularis/serosal layers (122, 651). Blood flow to the 
middle and distal colon is largely unaffected by SMA occlusion. Even with total SMA 
occlusion, there is limited perfusion (~25% of control) of the intestinal wall via collateral 
vessels (641). In sharp contrast, the blood supply to jejunum, ileum and colon is completely 
abolished after total SMA occlusion in neonates (1 day to 1 month old), responses that may 
contribute to neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis (163).
Intestinal I/R disrupts tight junctions between epithelial cells of the mucosal layer, which 
may allow movement of bacteria or enterotoxins from the lumen to the interstitial space of 
the affected bowel. From there, the translocated enterotoxin or bacteria can move to lymph 
nodes and the bloodstream. If the magnitude of ischemia is severe or the volume of ischemic 
mesenteric tissue is large, sepsis and multiple organ failure can ensue (423, 735). In support 
of this concept, depletion of gut commensal bacteria by antibiotic treatment was reported to 
be effective in reducing intestinal mucosal and lung injury induced by bowel ischemia (733, 
890). Interestingly, antibiotic depletion of the intestinal microbiome also reduced infarct size 
after myocardial I/R and stroke (63, 466, 640, 733, 830, 890), which is discussed in greater 
detail later.
The skin and skeletal muscle tolerate much longer durations of ischemia than other organs. 
Indeed, the resistance of these organs to ischemia has long been appreciated since acute 
arterial injuries involving the extremities often require emergency application of tourniquets, 
sometimes for hours, with little injury to the affected tissues, especially if the compression is 
released for a short period of time after the first 1.5 to 2 h and then reapplied (687). Indeed, 
arthroscopic procedures and other surgical interventions for extremity trauma benefit from 
this resistance to ischemia because tourniquet application allows operation in a bloodless 
field. Importantly, skeletal muscles contain satellite cells which can regenerate muscle tissue 
even after wide-spread injury, while the heart, brain and kidneys cannot (818).
Although the microvasculatures of different organs exhibit significant structural and 
functional differences, the processes leading to postischemic leukosequestration in ischemic 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 8
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
tissue regions are remarkably consistent (please see Fig. 10 and the section entitled 
“Inflammation Plays a Prominent Role in the Reperfusion Component of Total Tissue Injury 
in I/R,” for more detailed information). However, leukocyte recruitment in the liver is one 
important exception. Since hepatic sinusoids do not support selectin-mediated rolling or 
integrin-dependent adhesion as occurs in other microvascular beds, it has been suggested 
that sinusoidal leukocyte accumulation may be influenced more by physical factors such as 
low hydrodynamic forces and a vessel diameter that is close to that of leukocytes themselves 
(511). The sequestration of leukocytes in the lungs is also unusual compared to other organs 
in that postischemic PMN adhesion and migration occur primarily in alveolar capillaries and 
to a lesser extent in arterioles. In most other organs subjected to I/R, these adhesive 
interactions are largely confined to postcapillary venules, although arteriolar adhesion has 
also been noted in the coronary microcirculation (104). Moreover, the primacy of 
neutrophils in acute I/R injury is not clear in some tissues. For example, lymphocytes and 
monocytes may play a more important role in mediating injury responses in kidney (400) 
and brain (885).
Gut Microbiome and I/R
Our gastrointestinal tract (as well as the mucosal surfaces of the genitalia and respiratory 
system) harbors 100 trillion bacteria which interact with host cells in a symbiotic 
relationship to exchange nutrients, metabolites, and signaling molecules to influence a wide 
variety of physiologic processes ranging from energy regulation to cognitive function, with 
homeostasis maintained by the immune system (225, 226, 373). It is now appreciated that 
imbalances in the constituent populations of the intestinal microbiome, termed dysbiosis, 
contribute to causing or exacerbating disease states. Dysbiosis can be readily induced by 
environmental factors such as dietary changes and antibiotic regimens to modify intestinal 
microflora and thus influence disease states. One important cardiovascular consequence is 
contributions of the microbiome to atheromatous plaque formation via hepatic production of 
proatherogenic trimethylamine-N-oxide from trimethylamine (TMA) produced by gut 
microflora from phosphatidylcholine/choline and/or L-carnitine contained in red meat (434) 
(this work is discussed in greater detail later, under the section entitled “Genomic/Proteomic/
Metabolomic Insights”). Similarly, changes in the oral microbiota associated with 
periodontitis influence atherosclerotic and thrombolytic processes and increase the risk for 
myocardial infarction (313).
With regard to I/R, depletion of gut commensal bacteria by antibiotic treatment was reported 
to be effective in attenuating intestinal (890) and lung injury induced by bowel ischemia 
(640, 733, 830), reduced infarct size after myocardial I/R (466), and limited brain injury 
after stroke (63). Antibiotic-induced depletion of the gut microbiome also reduced the 
expression of TNF, IL-6, and COX-2, and toll-like receptors (TLRs) 2 and 4, attenuated the 
recruitment of immunocytes such as B cells, and decreased complement and 
immunoglobulin deposition (890). However, the interpretation of studies using antibiotics to 
deplete intestinal bacteria is complicated by the types of microbes they target, which alters 
the balance in existing microbial populations and allows resistant organisms to bloom. In 
addition, antibiotics can disrupt mucosal barrier function and reduce type 17 helper T cells, a 
lymphocyte subpopulation that contributes to intestinal I/R (209, 373, 807). Thus, germ-free 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 9
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
mice have been used as an approach to avoid these issues. Germ-free mice exhibited 
decreased expression of proinflammatory cytokines, reduced neutrophil sequestration, and 
decreased intestinal and pulmonary injury following intestinal I/R compared to that noted in 
mice with an intact intestinal microflora (735). Interestingly, these germ-free mice also 
demonstrate an increased expression of IL-10. When treated with a function-blocking 
antibody directed against this anti-inflammatory cytokine, mice lacking intestinal microflora 
exhibited I/R-induced inflammation and injury similar to that noted in conventional mice. 
Earlier work indicated that germ-free mice were protected from tissue injury induced by 
hemorrhagic shock (239). Based on recent work comparing antibiotic-treated to nondepleted 
mice, Benakis et al. (63) showed that intestinal bacteria participate in the trafficking of 
effector T cells from the small intestine to the leptomeninges in the brain where they 
exacerbate stroke-induced neuroinflammation secondary to secretion of IL-17. As a 
consequence, chemokine production is enhanced in the brain, leading to subsequent 
infiltration of neutrophils and other cytotoxic immune cells.
While the aforementioned work supports a role for the intestinal microbiota in exacerbating 
I/R injury, results of recent studies indicated that conventionally derived mice with an intact 
commensal bacterial population exhibited less injury after intestinal or renal I/R when 
compared to that noted in germ-free mice (379, 632, 846, 847). The protection against 
intestinal I/R injury was abrogated in mice that were genetically deficient in nucleotide-
binding oligomerization domain-containing protein 2 (Nod2), an intracellular pattern 
recognition receptor (PPR) that induces autophagy on detection of the microbial cell wall 
component, muramyl dipeptide (632). Treatment of Nod2−/− with the autophagy inducer 
rapamycin protected against I/R injury. Taken together, these observations were interpreted 
to support the concept that the presence of an intact intestinal flora confers protection 
against intestinal I/R by a mechanism that involves Nod2 signaling and induction of the 
autophagy response. The microbiota may also benefit the host to limit I/R injury through the 
production of protective short chain fatty acids (e.g., acetate, proprionate, and butyrate) that 
exert anti-inflammatory actions and inhibit histone deacetylases (HDACs) (6, 23). On the 
other hand, Winek et al. (846) reported that the presence of the conventional gut microbiota 
does not influence stroke infarct volume but may protect the intestine from the development 
of severe colitis after stroke.
It is not clear why some reports described earlier indicate a protective effect of the intestinal 
microbiome in I/R, while others report detrimental effects. Even though the gut of healthy 
humans contains a fairly stable community of microorganisms, the composition of the 
enteric microbiota may be highly variable between individuals (433). Enteric microbial 
diversity is influenced by diet, genetic factors, environment, and gender, among other 
factors, and can change very rapidly. Thus, it would seem that the most likely explanation 
for the discrepant findings described earlier relates to differences in composition of the 
enteric microbiota amongst laboratories. It has also been shown that stroke alters the 
bacterial composition in the cecum, with specific changes correlating with extent of injury 
by a mechanism that may involve altered autonomic nervous system function (354). This 
appears to be due to I/R-induced central nervous system (CNS) lesions that result in 
disrupted signaling via the autonomic nervous system and hypothalamic-pituitary axis. In 
turn, this results in an altered intestinal microenvironment secondary to depressed intestinal 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 10
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
motility and disrupted immune responses that favors bacterial synthesis of metabolic signals, 
immune modulators, neurotransmitters, neuromodulators and their precursors to modify 
systemic and gut immune responses, disrupt cellular metabolism, alter central 
hemodynamics, and reduce cerebral blood flow, actions which culminate in further 
depression of CNS function (354). Thus, changes in CNS function secondary to brain I/R 
modifies the intestinal microbiota, which may affect recovery and treatment outcomes. 
These points emphasize the importance of characterizing the enteric micro-biome in each 
study, which is now more practical with the development of new methods for low-error 
amplicon sequencing of bacterial 16S ribosomal RNA genes in combination with whole 
genome sequencing (226). Indeed, recent work indicates that intestinal microbial variation is 
a useful predictor of early acute rejection after organ transplantation (655).
Interestingly, peroral colonizing of the intestine with the probiotics Lactobacillus plantarum, 
or bifidobacteria (containing Bifidobacterium longum, Bifidobacterium bifidum, and 
Bifidobacterium adolescentis) for 2 weeks reduced bacterial translocation from the gut 
lumen to remote sites, decreased cytokine levels, and attenuated mucosal disruption induced 
by mesenteric I/R (824, 825, 829) (Fig. 4). Similarly, animals fed a probiotic product 
containing L. plantarum prior to induction of myocardial I/R exhibited reductions in infarct 
size, improved contractile function, and attenuated the rise of blood leptin levels compared 
to untreated animals (466) while rats subjected to 6 weeks of sustained coronary artery 
ligation and concomitantly treated with Lactobacillus rhamnosis exhibited reduced 
myocardial hypertrophy, improved systolic and diastolic left ventricular function, and 
reductions in leptin/adiponectin ratio relative to untreated animals (259). Postischemic liver 
injury is also reduced by peroral administration of Lactobacillus paracasei F19 (582). 
Gavaging mice with VSL#3, a commercially available probiotic mixture containing B. 
longum, Bifidobacterium breve, Bifidobacterium infantis, Lactobacillus acidophilus, 
Lactobacillus casei, Lactobacillus bulgaricus, and Streptococcus thermophilus, was 
associated with significant reductions in local and systemic inflammatory markers after 
intestinal I/R (680). Taken together, the results of the studies described in this section of the 
review emphasize a critical role for commensal bacteria in local and remote I/R injury, 
effects that can be modulated by altering the constituency of the intestinal microflora with 
probiotic feeding or other dietary/drug manipulations (18, 225, 422, 423) (Fig. 4).
Local I/R Can Induce Remote Organ Injury and Multiple Organ Failure
Injury to other organs often occurs on reperfusion after localized tissue ischemia, a 
phenomenon referred to as remote organ injury (ROI). Distant site injury can arise after I/R 
of the small or large intestines, lung, liver, kidney, skeletal muscle, or after aortic cross-
clamping (114, 224, 331, 341, 686, 733, 792, 803, 813, 837). This ROI can progress to acute 
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and systemic inflammatory response syndrome 
(SIRS) that are central to the pathogenesis of multiple organ dysfunction syndrome 
(MODS), especially if the volume of tissue affected by initial organ ischemia is large. 
Cardiac I/R may result in MODS if pump function is impaired to a degree that does not 
allow adequate perfusion of other organs. Pulmonary function is especially vulnerable to the 
deleterious effects of distant organ ischemia, particularly after bowel and/or liver I/R (114, 
331, 733). Indeed, ARDS almost always precedes the development of multiple organ failure 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 11
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
(114, 331, 686). Preexisting chronic inflammatory states likely exaggerate both local and 
remote cellular responses to exacerbate injury after reperfusion of the primary ischemic site 
(161).
In addition to pulmonary dysfunction, disruption of the intestinal mucosal barrier plays an 
important role in the development of MODS by allowing bacteria to enter the intestinal 
interstitium and lymphatics from the gut lumen. Bacterial translocation across the gut wall 
initiates and perpetuates the production of local inflammatory mediators that can gain access 
to distant organs via diffusing into the stream of reperfusing blood and via lymphatics 
draining the intestine (178, 740). Circulation of intestinal lymph back to the systemic 
circulation at the thoracic duct may be the primary route for entry of cytokines and other 
proinflammatory mediators after intestinal I/R, since mesenteric lymph duct ligation can 
prevent ROI (179). Lymphatics function in every postischemic organ to remove 
accumulating fluid, noxious antigens, cytokines, cellular debris and released 
macromolecules and provide a pathway for inflammatory cell efflux during repair of 
postischemic tissues (31). Moreover, cardiac lymphatic vessels demonstrate an impressive 
lymphangiogenic response that facilitates myocardial function after infarction via resolution 
of inflammation and accelerated healing (429).
Inflammatory leukocytes play a major role in the pathophysiology of ROI after localized 
I/R. A key event appears to be activation of neutrophils as they pass through the reperfused 
organ, which primes these granulocytes for sequestration in distant tissues (114). This 
involves not only the expression of adhesion molecules on the primed neutrophils, but also 
requires activation of endothelial cells in distant tissues (150). The latter step involves the 
release of inflammatory mediators into the stream of blood draining the reperfused organ 
and carried to distant sites by the circulation to promote adhesion molecule expression on 
postcapillary venules, as well as systemic complement activation. These mediators are 
derived from parenchymal cells, monocytes, and neutrophils in the ischemic tissue. Xanthine 
oxidase (XO), an enzyme that generates superoxide and hydrogen peroxide, has also been 
implicated in the pathogenesis of remote injury to cardiac muscle, lungs, and liver in 
response to intestinal I/R (114). However, its role in ROI is complex, involving ROS 
formation by a circulating form of the enzyme which is released from the surface of 
endothelial cells following I/R at the primary locus, as well as by XO-dependent formation 
of chemotactic factors at the local site, which subsequently promote recruitment of 
leukocytes to organs remote from the initial injury. In addition, reverse migration of 
neutrophils in the abluminal to luminal direction occurs in postischemic skeletal muscle, an 
event that is associated with enhanced ability to generate ROS by these cells. It appears that 
these reverse migrating cells can contribute to the development of reperfusion injury in the 
lung (851).
Neurogenic signals also contribute to inflammatory responses accompanying ROI (67, 91, 
734). The proinflammatory phenotype produced locally and in the lung by intestinal I/R is 
largely prevented by capsaicin-induced neurotransmitter depletion in sensory neurons and by 
administration of tachykinin receptor antagonists (734). Calcitonin gene-related peptide and 
substance P, neuropeptides released from both sensory nerve endings and inflammatory cells 
(526, 648) are the most likely mediators for these effects. Neurokin-independent signaling 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 12
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
may contribute to local and remote I/R-induced inflammatory responses via direct effects as 
well as release of TNFα (111, 734).
Risk Factors for I/R
Thromboembolic or atherothrombotic vasoocclusive diseases account for most ischemic 
episodes seen clinically in the westernized cultures. Advancing age, sex, and hereditary 
factors are risk factors for such events but there is little that can be done to prevent their 
effects per se (Fig. 5). Certain sex-specific risk factors, including early onset menopause and 
complications of pregnancy, such as preeclampsia or gestational diabetes, are associated 
with increased incidence of heart disease, but can be modified (371). Similarly, other 
important co-morbidities, including use of tobacco products and some recreational drugs 
(e.g., cocaine), occasional binge drinking, chronic overconsumption of alcohol (>3–4 drinks 
per day), hyperlipidemia, folate deficiency and hyperhomocysteinemia, hypertension, 
sedentary lifestyle, sleep disorders, such as obstructive sleep apnea, obesity, metabolic 
syndrome, and diabetes mellitus can be mitigated or controlled (81, 216, 236, 306, 664). It is 
now recognized that many comorbidities occur more frequently, exert more profound effects, 
and are/or more strongly associated with incidence of cardiovascular disease and myocardial 
infarction in women, including lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes mellitus, depression, and 
acute stress (669).
Unfortunately, most preclinical I/R work has been and continues to be conducted in young, 
healthy animals, where ischemia is acutely produced by ligating a vessel of interest or by 
placement of vascular clamps. Clearly, these models are not representative of relevant human 
patient populations, where thromboembolic or atherothrombotic vasoocclusive disease are 
the precipitating events and occur in an inflammatory environment not present in young, 
healthy subjects with minimal or no risk factors. In addition, cardioprotective drugs and 
experimental maneuvers such as ischemic preconditioning that are effective in limiting I/R 
injury in young and healthy animals, often fail to confer protection in the presence of 
comorbid risk factors (Fig. 5). The mechanisms underlying the impaired efficacy of 
conditioning is listed below each of the italicized comorbid risk factors in the figure. 
Surprisingly little attention has been devoted to the effect of cigarette smoking to limit the 
efficacy of conditioning or with regard to the mechanisms by which this impairment occurs 
(Fig. 5).
Caffeine consumption also reduces the effectiveness preconditioning, as does the ingestion 
of alcoholic beverages, an effect that disappears as the absorbed ethanol is metabolized and 
eliminated from the blood. While use of some recreational drugs (e.g., cocaine) abolishes 
ischemic preconditioning, morphine (or other opioids) injections, or smoking marijuana may 
induce preconditioned phenotypes via activation of opioid and cannabinoid receptors, 
respectively (Fig. 5). It is also important to note that many of the drugs commonly used in 
the therapeutic management of patients with cardiovascular disease who are at high risk for 
myocardial infarction or stroke reduce or abolish the effectiveness of preconditioning stimuli 
by affecting their underlying signaling mechanisms (Fig. 5). Importantly, recent studies have 
shown that caloric restriction, consumption of alcoholic beverages at low levels (1–2 drinks 
per day, with beneficial effect present only once ethanol has been metabolized), and exercise 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 13
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
increase ischemic tolerance in hearts and other organs in the presence of comorbidities, even 
those risk factors that are irreversible (advancing age) or cannot be controlled (male sex, 
genetic factors) (81, 450) (Fig. 5).
Fetal Programming, Transgenerational Inheritance, and Susceptibility to 
Ischemic Vascular Disease
It is now clear that a variety of factors may be encountered in fetal life that are associated 
with increased risk for cardiovascular disease in adults (14, 660). Work conducted by Barker 
and coworkers (46–48, 536) provided the first evidence that decreased full term birth 
weights from approximately 9 to 5.5 pounds, as an index of poor intrauterine nutrition, was 
associated with increased incidence and mortality from ischemic disease in adults. He 
hypothesized that this association was driven by a failure of fetal nutritional supply to meet 
demands, causing the fetus to undergo physiologic adaptions to survive in utero by 
modifying blood flow distribution and thus nutrient delivery to spare the most vital organs at 
the expense of other organs (314). Subsequent work demonstrated a similar correlation in 
adults who had higher than average birthweights (>9.5 pounds) (536). This “U”-shaped 
relation between birth weight and cardiac disease has been recapitulated in a large number of 
studies supporting the concept that a broad range of environmental cues (maternal stress, 
age, obesity, cocaine, ethanol or tobacco smoke exposure, hemodynamic effects, growth 
factors, preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, oxygen, and nutrient availability) can influence 
placental growth and initiate programs that enhance the myocardial susceptibility to 
ischemic disease later in life (468, 657).
The maladaptive responses to intrauterine stresses that lead to increased disease risk in 
adults have been termed fetal programming or fetal origins of disease. Indeed, low birth 
weight is also associated with increased incidence of hypertension, obesity, type 2 diabetes, 
and chronic renal disease later in life (657, 782). These chronic disease states represent 
major risk factors for cardiovascular disorders, again suggesting that fetal programming is an 
important contributor to the prevalence of ischemic disease in westernized cultures. In 
addition, recent work indicates that prenatal exposure to hypoxia or cocaine inhibit the 
infarct-sparing effects of ischemic preconditioning later in adult life by a mechanism 
involving irreversible fetal reprogramming of protein kinase C epsilon expression (561, 
626). A large number of studies have provided evidence that adult animals that were exposed 
to hypoxia, glucocorticoids or maternal low protein diet or obesity in fetal life demonstrate 
an increased susceptibility to I/R in the early postnatal period (108a, 211a, 211b, 268a, 268b, 
327a, 390a, 491a, 491b, 626, 626a, 626b, 660, 675b, 676a, 782, 863a, 864a, 864b, 864c). 
These results support the notion that a fetus developing in adverse conditions becomes an 
adult who is susceptible to enhanced I/R injury.
The mechanisms contributing to the development of adult cardiovascular disease after fetal 
stress in utero are only now being uncovered. Barker’s group originally proposed fetal 
malnutrition induced persistent glucose-preserving adaptations that ultimately contribute to 
the development of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes in later life (314). The 
development of this so-called thrifty phenotype in response to fetal malnutrition was 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 14
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
proposed to confer a competitive advantage by preparing the newborn for an anticipated 
deficient nutritional environment at birth (53). While potentially advantageous to the 
newborn, placental insufficiency is ultimately maladaptive, because it contributes to the 
appearance of adult cardiovascular disease secondary to the effect of intrauterine 
programming to limit fetal growth (323, 782). With regard to adult susceptibility to I/R after 
fetal stress, there is a growing body of evidence indicating that reductions in the expression 
of cardioprotective genes such as protein kinase Cε (PKCε), endothelial nitric oxide 
synthase (eNOS), adenosine monophosphate (AMP) kinase, and heat-shock protein70 by a 
ROS-mediated, but nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase-
independent epigenetic repression mechanism may play a role (211a, 268b, 390a, 491a, 
491b, 626, 626a, 626b, 864a). In addition, fetal hypoxia induces changes in extracellular 
matrix and myofibrillar architecture, oxidative stress, diastolic dysfunction, reduced 
capillary density, sympathetic dominance, glucocorticoid receptor deficiency, and altered 
endothelium-dependent vasodilator function in adult hearts, which may contribute to this 
enhanced susceptibility to I/R (108a, 211b, 268a, 268b, 327a, 327b, 675a, 675b, 675c, 675d, 
676a, 857, 863a).
Fetal malnutrition restricts intrauterine growth and is associated with oxidative and 
nitrosative stress, altered gene expression related to nutrient metabolism, angiogenesis, 
inflammatory cytokine expression, and decreased placental growth factor expression. 
Although it remains to be determined whether these changes are causal in nature, an 
emerging body of evidence supports the idea that intrauterine glucocorticoid overexposure 
may explain the relation between low birth weight and increased risk for the development of 
obesity, hypertension, type 2 diabetes, altered renal function, and ischemic disease in later 
life (56, 468, 568, 657). It is almost certain that the link between fetal growth and adult onset 
disease involves changes in gene expression, which most likely involve epigenetic 
phenomena (468, 657, 814, 815). In this regard, gestational hypoxia induces epigenetic 
repression of the glucocorticoid receptor gene in the developing heart, which results in 
increased susceptibility to myocardial I/R injury after birth (857). Epigenetic changes also 
likely contribute to transgenerational programming (10, 14, 21, 814, 815). The intrauterine 
environment also influences the functions of adipose tissue and the innate immune system, 
which may ultimately enhance the likelihood for development of cardiovascular disease in 
later life (182, 600, 757). More recently, it has become appreciated that early bacterial 
colonization of the neonatal gut influences the occurrence of cardiovascular and other 
diseases later in life, suggesting a role of the microbiome in fetal programming (440).
Several Modes of Cell Death Are Induced by I/R
I/R-induced cell death was long thought to occur solely by necrosis, an unregulated and 
irreversible process that is characterized by mitochondrial swelling, cytoplasmic 
vacuolization, and swelling of the nucleus and cytoplasm (oncosis) secondary to energy 
failure brought on by the reduction in the blood supply. Loss of plasma membrane integrity 
allows release of toxic cellular molecules to trigger a pronounced inflammatory response, 
with both processes exacerbating destruction of the affected cell and collateral damage to 
adjacent cells (Fig. 6). While it was also once thought that reducing the duration of ischemia 
and the magnitude of reperfusion injury were the only therapeutic options to prevent this 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 15
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
fatal injury, the discovery that necrotic cell death could be reduced by ischemic 
preconditioning, coupled with an understanding of the underlying cardioprotective 
mechanisms, has led to the concept that activation of survival kinases and inhibition of the 
mitochondrial PTP are therapeutic modalities worth pursuing into clinical trials as a means 
to limit necrosis. Very recent work indicates that the mitochondrial PTP can undergo 
transient low conductance openings termed MitoWinks that function to promote 
mitochondrial and cell survival by allowing resetting of individual mitochondria to limit 
matrix calcium overload with little energetic cost (518). This raises the intriguing possibility 
that MitoWinks may be involved in the ROS generation that activates the RISK pathway of 
cardio-protection in ischemic preconditioning, as has been shown for opening of mKATP 
channels.
Importantly, it is now recognized that cells subjected to I/R also die in a programmed 
manner via apoptosis and autophagy, processes that are regulated by coordinated cellular 
signaling mechanisms (442, 454, 599, 832) (Fig. 6). Furthermore, it now appears that the 
apparently random, unregulated and irreversible events that lead to I/R-induced necrosis 
may, under certain circumstances, involve the activation and orchestration of specific 
signaling mechanisms in yet another death pathway termed programmed necrosis or 
necroptosis (253, 442, 599, 832) (Fig. 6). Thus, it may be possible to salvage ischemic cells 
undergoing regulated cell death by apoptosis, autophagy, and necroptosis by interfering with 
the signaling pathways involved (see 599 for review). In subsections below, we describe the 
basic mechanisms underlying each of these distinct but overlapping cell death modalities 
and the evidence they contribute in to the pathogenesis of lethal I/R injury.
Apoptosis
Apoptosis is characterized morphologically by membrane blebbing, cell shrinkage, nuclear 
fragmentation and chromatin condensation, while activation of caspases is the distinguishing 
biochemical feature (453) (Fig. 6). The cell signaling mechanisms underlying apoptotic cell 
death can occur via the extrinsic (or death receptor) and intrinsic (mitochondrial) pathways 
(Fig. 6), although there multiple biochemical and functional linkages between the two (94, 
442, 453, 832, 843).
The extrinsic or death receptor pathway involves binding of ligands, such as Fas, TRAIL, 
and TNFα, to proinflammatory receptors, resulting in their trimerization. This promotes 
recruitment of death domain-containing adapter proteins (e.g., FADD and TRADD) to 
complete the death-inducing signaling complex. Once assembled, this receptor complex 
activates caspase-8, a protease that activates caspase-3 by a cleavage-dependent mechanism. 
Caspase-3 hydrolyzes many cellular proteins to bring about apoptosis (94, 169, 383, 442, 
453, 843).
In response to cytotoxic stimuli such as oxidative stress, the intrinsic or mitochondrial 
pathway is activated (Fig. 6). This involves incorporation of Bcl2 protein family members 
such as Bax and Bak into the outer mitochondrial membrane (94, 453, 843). While not well 
understood from a mechanistic standpoint, these prodeath proteins enable the release of pro-
apoptotic proteins cytochrome c, Smac/DIABLO, Omi/HtrA2, and endonuclease-G (endo-
G) from the inter-membrane space by acting to permeabilize the outer membrane. 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 16
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cytochrome c binds to the cytosolic protein APAF1 to stimulate assembly the apoptosome, a 
multi-protein complex in which caspase-9 and 3 protease system is activated, resulting in 
cellular protein cleavage. Caspase activation also occurs by mechanisms dependent on 
Smac/DIABLO and Omi/HtrA2, but these prodeath proteins do so by sequestering or 
digesting caspase-inhibitory proteins. Lastly, DNA fragmentation characteristic of this form 
of apoptosis is mediated by endo-G (94, 453, 843).
Apoptotic cell death is induced by I/R, although the extent of cells dying via this modality is 
significantly lower than necrosis. Upregulation and activation of prodeath Bcl2 proteins 
(e.g., Bax, Bak, Bid, BNIP3, and Puma) and their translocation and integration into 
mitochondrial membranes occurs in ischemic cells (199, 320, 389, 560, 836, 852). However, 
ischemia per se is not sufficient for activation of Bcl2 proteins because many are redox 
sensitive, requiring the oxidative stress that is evoked by reperfusion. The observations that 
Bax-, Bid-, BNIP3-, or Puma-deficient animals demonstrate reduced apoptotic cell death 
clearly support their contribution to the progression of postischemic tissue injury (64, 199, 
788, 836, 852). Surprisingly, the degree of protection noted in these knockout animals was 
greater than would be predicted from the extent of postischemic apoptosis, suggesting that 
these prodeath Bcl2 proteins may have effects that are independent of their role in apoptotic 
signaling during I/R. Alternatively, genetic knockout of proapoptotic Bcl2 proteins, may 
produce compensatory alterations in antiapoptotic proteins, which also influence Ca2+ 
homeostasis, thereby modifying the extent of I/R injury (701).
A number of apoptogenic factors are released from mitochondria during I/R, including the 
archetypal cytochrome c. Other apoptogens that are released during I/R and likely contribute 
to I/R injury include the caspase activators Omi/HtrA2 and Smac/DIABLO. Indeed, 
pharmacologic or genetic inhibition of Omi/HtrA2 attenuates postischemic death by 
apoptotic mechanisms (419, 590), but such approaches have not yet been used to more 
clearly define a causal role for Smac/DIABLO in I/R injury. Although cerebral ischemia 
induces release of mitochondrial endonuclease G (588), mice genetically deficient in this 
inducer of nuclear DNA fragmentation during apoptosis retained their sensitivity to 
prolonged I/R (864).
I/R-induced cell death is reduced in animals treated with pan-caspase inhibitors, providing 
additional support for the notion that apoptosis contributes to death of cardiac myocytes 
(169, 350, 360, 870, 875). Similar observations were observed after genetic deletion or 
knockdown of specific caspases participating in the extrinsic and intrinsic pathways (152, 
473). While such observations might lead to the proposal that targeting caspases may be an 
important therapeutic means to reduce I/R injury, caspase inhibition may not be ideal 
because other aspects of mitochondrial function will still be adversely affected. As a 
consequence, caspase inhibition may at best only delay the inevitable, but at worst, may 
instead drive the cell to necrotic death (812).
Mice deficient in Fas, TNF receptor 1, or TRAF1 exhibit smaller infarcts than wild-type 
mice, suggesting that death receptor pathway activation contributes (383, 480, 519, 910, 
911). On the other hand, smaller infarcts are also noted in Bax knockout mice or mice 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 17
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
treated with a small molecule inhibitor of Omi/Htr2, suggesting that the mitochondrial 
pathway is also activated to produce apoptosis in I/R (343, 344, 519).
Autophagy
Autophagy occurs under normal conditions where it functions as a mechanism for disposal 
of damaged or obsolete organelles and protein aggregates by a process involving packaging 
into autophagosomes that are transferred to lysosomes for elimination from the cell. This 
process is also activated by conditions associated with I/R (e.g., energy deprivation, 
oxidative stress, and ER stress), where it acts to promote cell survival by generating amino 
acids and fatty acids for maintenance of cell function or by removing damaged organelles, 
oxidized proteins, and protein aggregates (115, 331, 390, 539, 540, 698) (Fig. 6). 
Furthermore, since ischemia basically starves cells of nutrients (and oxygen), the autophagic 
breakdown of cellular components might promote cellular survival by providing substrates 
for maintaining cellular energy levels. In support of the latter concept, inhibition of 
autophagy has been shown to amplify I/R-induced damage (390, 762), while pharmacologic 
stimulation of autophagy confers protection against I/R (115, 116, 359). However, if the 
ischemic period is prolonged, the extent of autophagic degradation of critical cellular 
constituents contributes to postischemic damage and thus is a death modality in I/R (320, 
326, 539, 540, 700, 805, 900).
Morphologically, autophagy begins with assembly of the phagophore, an isolation 
membrane that expands around the cell constituents to be processed (284, 330, 489). As this 
isolation membrane expands to fully encase the cell compartment/organelle, it forms the 
vesicular autophagosome. Fusion of this structure with a lysosome permits degradation of 
the enveloped materials. Thus, autophagy performs a housekeeping function in normal cells. 
Autophagy is regulated principally by the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), which 
inhibits the process. However, this negative regulation is disinhibited (i.e., mTOR is 
inactivated) under conditions associated with I/R, such as nutrient withdrawal or oxidative 
stress (284, 330, 489, 540). This derepresses several kinases (Atg1, Atg13, and Atg17) that 
initiate the formation of the phagophore by a process that involves activation of Vps34, a 
class III phosphatidyl inositol 3 kinase, which in turn binds to Vps150, Atg14, and beclin-1. 
This complex functions to recruit other regulatory proteins which are essential for the 
expansion of the isolation membrane to form the mature vesicular autophagosome. Fusion of 
the autophagosome with a lysosome occurs by a mechanism dependent on the small GTPase 
Rab7 and the lysosomal membrane protein LAMP2 (284, 330, 489).
Mitophagy is a cargo-specific form of autophagy that selectively targets mitochondria for 
degradation. It is further differentiated from autophagy by its cellular signaling mechanisms, 
which involve parkin and PINK1, which facilitate sequestration of damaged mitochondria 
into autophagosomes. I/R is associated with reductions in parkin protein levels after stroke 
(558), suggesting that decreased mitophagy may allow accumulation of damaged 
mitochondria and ensuing cell death. Moreover, the protective effects of ischemic and 
pharmacologic preconditioning appear to require mitophagy to selectively eliminate 
mitochondria damaged by subsequent exposure to I/R (24, 283, 284, 342, 457). This may 
leave behind a population of mitochondria that have a high threshold for opening of the 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 18
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
mitochondrial PTP, thereby reducing the likelihood of I/R-induced cell death in 
preconditioned tissues (283, 327, 457). This notion is further supported by the observation 
that stimulation of mitophagy by overexpression of regulator of calcineurin 1-1L protects 
hypoxic cardiomyocytes from apoptosis (867).
Necrosis versus regulated necrosis
Necrosis is characterized morphologically by swelling of cells and their constituent 
organelles, mitochondrial disruption, absence of nuclear fragmentation, plasma membrane 
rupture, and leakage of intracellular contents, which leads to the demise of the cell. In 
contrast to the genetically encoded nature of apoptosis and autophagy, where cell signaling 
programs are activated to produce cell death, necrosis is often referred to as accidental cell 
death because it was believed to occur by random, uncontrolled processes that led to 
expiration of the cell in response to overwhelming stress. However, it is now recognized that 
programmed (which occurs in a physiological setting to preserve tissue homeostasis) or 
regulated (which occurs in pathologic conditions) necrosis occurs in embryonic development 
and in pathologic states, especially I/R, respectively (Fig. 6). While these cell death 
modalities share features with necrosis, they can be inhibited by pharmacologic and genetic 
interventions directed at signaling elements that ultimately result in death of the cell. This 
implies that regulated and programmed necrosis rely on distinct molecular mechanisms that 
are under tight control versus the random, uncontrolled events typifying necrotic cell death 
that occurs in response to very harsh environmental pertubations that cannot be delimited. 
Cells can be driven to regulated necrosis by I/R via activation of at least three separate 
signaling pathways, which are delineated by the terms necroptosis, mitochondrial 
permeability transition-dependent regulated necrosis (MPT-RN), and parthanatos (22, 231, 
233, 258, 599) (Fig. 6).
Necroptosis is activated by cell stress or ligation of death receptors, such as TNF receptor 1 
or Fas receptor, by their ligands and leads to mobilization and activation of a group of serine/
threonine kinases called receptor interacting protein kinases (RIPKs) (Fig. 6). Once 
activated, two particular RIPKs, RIPK1, and RIPK3, coordinate their activities to increase 
oxidative stress via stimulation of NADPH oxidases or mitochondrial oxidant production via 
a complex signaling path that results in cell death (566, 567, 727, 812), RIP3 also 
phosphorylates the pseudokinase mixed lineage kinase domain-like protein (MLKL) to 
cause necroptosis. The finding that necrostatin-1 reduces TNFα- and I/R-induced cell death 
through inhibition of RIP1 kinase activity while RIP3-deficient mice are protected from I/R 
supports the concept that necroptosis occurs via receptor-induced, well-regulated cellular 
processes (130, 175, 207, 234, 503–508, 593, 727, 861, 913). Further confirmation of the 
necroptotic pathway in I/R-induced cell death will come from use of the recently described 
MLKL knockout mouse (853).
One potential mitochondrial target for RIP-mediated necrosis is the MPT pore. This large, 
nonspecific channel in the inner mitochondrial membrane is normally closed, but opens 
during I/R in response to overexuberant ROS production and excessive increases in 
mitochondrial matrix Ca2+ levels (35–38, 316, 453). As a result, the permeability of the 
inner membrane suddenly increases, which dissipates the proton electrochemical gradient 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 19
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
(ΔΨm). This results in ATP depletion, further ROS production, and ultimately swelling and 
rupture of the organelle. This death modality is critically dependent on cyclophilin D and 
constitutes a second form of regulated necrosis that is designated MPT-dependent regulated 
necroptosis (MPT-RN) (Fig. 6) (13, 35–38, 258, 316, 453).
The cell death modality designated parthanatos represents a third form of regulated necrosis 
(Fig. 6). Parthanatos is activated by genotoxic stresses such as oxidants and alkylating agents 
as well as I/R, which in turn leads to an overstimulation of the DNA repair enzyme 
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP1) (231). PARP1 activates calpain, a cysteine 
protease that acts to promote the release of the perhaps misnamed apoptosis-inducing factor 
(AIF) from the mitochondria. AIF then moves to the nucleus and degrades DNA (90, 827). 
There is some evidence that PARP1-mediated cell death may require RIPK 1 (863), but how 
this kinase or the MPT integrates in the parthanatos signaling cascade is unclear.
Two newly described and related forms of regulated, non-apoptotic cell death—ferroptosis 
and oxytosis—have also been recently implicated in I/R (Fig. 6). Both types share common 
trigger (inhibition of the cystine-glutamate antiporter system Xc− and resulting depletion of 
glutathione) and execution (lipid peroxidation) mechanisms, but differ in their requirement 
for lipoxygenases, which participate in oxytosis (110, 151). As the name implies, ferroptosis 
is a cell death modality that is characterized by iron-dependent lipid peroxidation. 
Ferroptosis inhibitors such as liproxstatin-1 and third-generation ferrostatins have been 
shown to decrease liver and kidney injury after I/R (110, 117, 250, 455). On the other hand, 
oxytosis is characterized by increased peroxide tone that is associated with translocation of 
12- and 15-lipoxygenases to cellular membranes, particularly in mitochondria, resulting in 
peroxidation of lipid components (151). This form of programmed cell death has been 
shown to occur in stroke and myocardial infarction via use of lipoxygenase inhibitors or 
genetic ablation of 15-lipoxygenase (117, 392, 617, 618, 731, 811, 883).
From the foregoing discussion, it is clear that cells die in the ischemic zone by necrosis, 
apoptosis, autophagy, and at least five forms of regulated necrosis (necroptosis, MPT-RN, 
parthanatos, ferroptosis, and oxytosis). However, the relative contributions of each death 
modality to overall infarction induced by I/R remain unclear. Nor is it known which tissues 
are most sensitive to each death mechanism. Given that inhibitor studies specific for each 
death modality provide only partial protection, while combination therapies can be 
synergistic, it would appear that there is a strong degree of interconnectivity and overlap in 
the signaling transduction elements mediating programmed cell death (678).
Mechanisms Underlying I/R Cell Injury and Death
The net result of the multiple, often interactive mechanisms that contribute to the 
pathogenesis of I/R injury is damage to proteins, lipids, carbohydrate moieties, and DNA in 
cells and tissues. The cumulative toll of these harsh insults, if sufficiently severe, results in 
cell death by necrosis and programmed cell death by mechanisms described earlier. The next 
several sections summarizes major sequelae to I/R and what is known about the underlying 
mechanisms.
Kalogeris et al.
Page 20
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Calcium overload
When the blood supply to an organ is reduced, the cells in the affected region switch to 
anaerobic glycolysis to generate ATP. This leads to lactate, H+, and NADH+ accumulation 
and cytosolic pH decreases. In an attempt to reestablish acid-base balance, the 
plasmolemmal NHE is activated and transports H+ ions out of the cytosol in exchange for 
Na+ (35–38, 572). The influx of Na+ ions in turn activates the plasmolemmal Na+/Ca2+ 
exchanger which exchanges Na+ for Ca2+ (Fig. 1). Upon reperfusion, the activity of the 
NHE exchanger is accelerated by the washout of the extracellular H+ ions that accumulated 
during ischemia, which increases the proton gradient across the plasmolemma and further 
increases cytosolic Ca2+ (35, 36, 572, 683, 766). In addition, Ca2+ handling by the 
endoplasmic/sarcoplasmic reticulum (ER/SR) SERCA ATPase is impaired by I/R, which 
limits Ca2+ reuptake from the cytosol. On the other hand, Ca2+ release from the ER/SR via 
ryanodine receptors is enhanced (683, 759, 766). These perturbations in ER/SR calcium 
handling further exacerbate the lethal elevations in cytoplasmic Ca2+ levels (Fig. 1). The 
massive increases in intracellular Ca+ concentrations activate a variety of processes, 
described later, which contribute to cell death following I/R.
In an attempt to deal with the enormous alterations in cytosolic Ca2+ levels induced by I/R, 
transport via the mitochondrial Ca2+ uniporter is increased. Using the negative ΔΨm created 
by I/R, this transporter drives movement of the positively charged Ca2+ ions into the 
mitochondrial matrix (153, 759, 766) (Fig. 1). While this reduces cytosolic Ca2+, elevations 
in mitochondrial Ca2+ trigger the MPT. Pathological activation of calpains, a family of 
cysteine proteases that target a variety of cytoskeletal, ER, and mitochondrial proteins, as 
well as depressed activity of Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinases (CaMKs) also 
occur in response to I/R-induced elevations Ca2+ (160, 164, 583). Ischemic preconditioning 
appears to prevent the I/R-induced depression of SR CaMK II activity (609) while 
pharmacological inhibition of calpains exerts protective effects in variety of organs (119, 
129, 138, 336, 436, 484, 537, 629, 791). In addition, calpastatin, an endogenous calpain 
inhibitor, can be degraded during I/R, thereby enhancing calpain activity (715, 732). 
Therapeutic transfer of the calpastatin gene reduces myocardial contractile dysfunction and 
infarction induced by I/R (525).
Another pathologic process that is driven by increased intracellular Ca2+ during I/R is the 
formation of calcium pyrophosphate complexes and uric acid. These entities both constitute 
danger signals that activate inflammasomes to initially generate IL-1β and TNFα to 
exacerbate I/R injury. These cytokines in turn activate transcription factors such as NFkB to 
increase expression of additional cytokines and chemokines, thereby fueling a cytokine 
storm in a vicious cycle to provoke further cell injury by profound inflammation (7, 44, 
239).
Oxidative/nitrosative stress
As noted above, the influx of oxygen that occurs when the blood supply to an ischemic 
organ is reestablished fuels the excessive production of ROS, creating the paradox that 
reperfusion can induce injury (oxygen paradox) because these highly reactive species can 
modify proteins, lipids, nucleic acids, and sugars in cells and tissues to dysfunction and cell 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 21
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
death. While the primary importance of ROS production in the pathophysiology of I/R 
injury was first identified 35 years ago (293) (Fig. 10), it is now appreciated that redox 
molecules derived from NO [referred to as reactive nitrogen species (RNS)] also contribute 
to I/R injury via oxidative and nitrosative reactions with virtually every biomolecule found 
in cells (see 204, 243, 290, 292, 463, 615, 649, 682 for review). However, depending on their 
concentrations, both NO and ROS can either participate directly in I/R or in conferring 
protection by ischemic and pharmacological preconditioning and postconditioning (244). 
RNOS contribute to the deleterious effects of I/R by modifying macromolecule structure and 
function, disrupting/activating signaling cascades, stimulating the production/release of 
proinflammatory mediators by various cell types, inducing the expression of adhesion 
molecules that mediate leukocyte-endothelial cell adhesive interactions, and decreasing the 
bioavailability of protective NO (222, 243, 290, 292, 463, 615, 649).
Reactive oxygen species in I/R
Oxidant and nitrosative stress during I/R (and other conditions) involves direct damage by 
RNOS to nucleic acids, proteins, lipids, and carbohydrates (292–294). In addition, cell 
signaling dysfunction is produced by “indirect” effects that are mediated by RNOS-
dependent alterations in thiol redox circuits or by direct effects via covalent, oxidative, or 
nitrosative modification of key regulatory proteins in cell signaling cascades (92, 154, 273, 
498). A cornerstone piece of evidence that oxidants play an important role in I/R is derived 
from application of ROS detection methods, such as redox-sensitive green fluorescent 
protein, 2′,7′-dihydorodichorofluorescein, and MitoSox Red, among others, to postischemic 
tissues. Data obtained using such methods does not allow determination of which ROS is 
being produced, but are widely accepted as specific markers for oxidative stress in I/R. 
However, very recent work that these methods also detect reactive sulfide species (RSS) and 
indeed are more sensitive to RSS than ROS, suggesting that such methods cannot distinguish 
ROS from RSS (181). As a consequence, the production of ROS in particular states may be 
overestimated, while potential contributions of RSS to the outcome may not be appreciated. 
This is more likely a problem for ROS assessment under normal conditions, where oxidants 
and H2S are both produced, probably in similar amounts (181), to subserve signaling 
functions, whereas the oxidant production is clearly elevated in I/R as assessed by electron 
paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy (462, 481, 924), while it is likely that production of 
cardioprotective H2S is reduced.
Superoxide and other ROS
The univalent reduction of molecular oxygen produces the superoxide anion radical (O2−), 
which is the initial reactive oxygen species produced during I/R. Support for this concept 
was first presented by Granger and coworkers, who showed that IRI was reduced 
significantly by treatment with SOD (293) (Fig. 7). Subsequent work demonstrating that less 
IRI occurred in animals treated with SOD mimetics and in genetic models where the 
cytoplasmic or mitochondrial isoforms of SOD were overexpressed (132).
Superoxide per se is not particularly toxic in vivo because this radical species undergoes 
rapid, spontaneous (i.e., non-catalytic) dismutation to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), a 
conversion accelerated about ten thousand-fold by SOD. This rapid conversion effectively 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 22
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
prevents the reaction of O2− with other biomolecules in cells unless generation of O2− is in 
very close proximity to potential reactants. On the other hand, H2O2 derived from the 
dismutation of superoxide can be directly cytotoxic when produced at high concentrations 
and can also fuel the generation of the highly reactive hydroxyl radical (HO·) via the iron- or 
copper-catalyzed Fenton reaction. Phagocytic cells use an NADPH oxidase isoform to 
generate superoxide, which dismutates to H2O2, a damaging oxidant in its own right but 
which is also a substrate for myeloperoxidase (MPO)-catalyzed formation of hypochlorous 
acid. Moreover, superoxide can be converted to another highly reactive species, the 
hydroperoxyl radical (HOO•), in the acidic environment that typifies ischemic tissues (11). 
Superoxide-dependent cell toxicity can also be initiated by its interaction with NO, which 
leads to the formation of peroxynitrite (ONOO−) and other damaging RNOS. Peroxynitrite 
can be protonated to form peroxynitrous acid (ONOOH), itself a strong and highly cytotoxic 
oxidant. Peroxynitrite also serves as precursor to •OH generation, being more effective in 
this regard than the reaction of reduced iron with H2O2 to produce hydroxyl radicals. 
Finally, if produced within several molecular diameters of target reactants, especially 
enzymes with iron-sulfur centers such as aconitase, fumarase, NADH dehydrogenase, 
creatine kinase, and calcineurin, superoxide can oxidatively inactivate their catalytic 
functions (649). Interestingly, circadian variations in the expression of calcineurin as well as 
its regulator RCan1.4, confer time-of-day changes in the susceptibility of the myocardium to 
IRI (673). Whether oxidants play a role in this response has not been evaluated, but it is 
clear that there is an interplay between the circadian clock and cellular redox status (17, 26, 
554).
Sources of superoxide
Superoxide is produced by number of cellular enzymes, as well as via the electron transport 
chain in mitochondria. The major enzymatic sources are XO, NADPH oxidases, cytochrome 
P450 oxidases, and uncoupled NOS. The relative importance of each of these enzymes in the 
development of oxidative stress in I/R varies depending upon the species and tissue 
examined, time after the onset of I/R, or the experimental protocol used to produce IRI. For 
example, endothelial XO plays a major role in ROS generation early on, while leukocyte 
NADPH oxidase may be more quantitavely significant in the later phases in a model of 
bowel I/R (289). While ROS-induced apoptotic cell death in neurons exposed to anoxia-
reoxygenation also appears to involve a temporal shift in oxidant sources, a transient 
increase in mitochondrial ROS production occurs early during hypoxia that progresses to a 
XO-dependent second phase, while enhanced NADPH oxidase activity predominates as a 
ROS source upon reoxygenation (4).
Although expressed in many tissues, particularly high levels of XO have been reported in 
hepatocytes, intestinal enterocytes, and capillary endothelial cells (624). Under hypoxic 
conditions such as ischemia, XO is formed from xanthine dehydrogenase, while one of its 
substrates, hypoxanthine, accummulates in the tissues secondary to ATP catabolism and lack 
of washout because the flow of blood is interrupted. This sets the stage for a burst of O2− 
production when the other required substrate, molecular oxygen, floods the tissues on 
reperfusion (Fig. 7). The importance of XO-derived O2− in I/R is shown by the decreases in 
Ca2+ overload, markers of oxidant stress, leukocyte infiltration, and tissue injury that occur 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 23
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
when the enzyme is inhibited or depleted prior to I/R (290, 463, 649). XO bound to the 
surface of endothelial cells is released during local tissue I/R, resulting in increased plasma 
concentrations of the enzyme, which can circulate to remote organs to instigate oxidant-
dependent distant site injury. It is of interest to note that XO catalyzes the conversion of 
nitrite to NO (278), providing mechanistic insight regarding the effectiveness of nitrite 
treatment for ischemic disorders (719).
In addition to XO, I/R-induced oxidative stress also involves superoxide generated by two 
general forms of the NADPH oxidases (NOX), the prototypical NOX of phagocytic 
leukocytes and isoforms expressed by a variety of non-phagocytic cells. Phagocytic NOX is 
quantitatively most significant in terms of total superoxide generated in response to I/R. 
Normally, this NOX isoform is inactive, but can be stimulated to participate in host defense 
on exposure to bacteria as well as by inflammatory mediators released in sterile 
inflammatory conditions such as I/R. These stimuli provoke a massive respiratory burst 
characterized by superoxide release extracellularly or into phagolysosomes (463, 649). 
Phagocyte NOX-derived O2− rapidly dismutates to hydrogen peroxide, which fuels hydroxyl 
radical generation via the Fenton reactions as well as MPO-catalyzed production of 
hypochlorous acid.
As noted above, a second general class of NOX isoforms are expressed in nonphagocytic 
cells, expecially fibroblasts, vascular smooth muscle, and endothelial cells comprising the 
vascular wall (391, 463, 649). These vascular isoforms differ from the phagocytic NOX in 
that they are constitutively active, produce low levels of superoxide, and participate in cell 
signaling via effects on kinases and phosphatases (391). However, their activity can be 
upregulated by proinflammatory mediators, with maximal rates of O2− production that are 
approximately 10% of those achieved during the respiratory burst by leukocyte NOX. 
Superoxide production at this rate, although relatively low, is sufficient to contribute to I/R-
induced oxidant stress (208, 261).
Phagocytic NOX is not constitutively active under normal conditions because its regulatory 
subunits are sequestered in separate subcellular compartments. Holoenzyme assembly of 
activated NOX is driven by exposure to proinflammatory mediators, which results in 
recruitment of these cytosolic moieties to the catalytic subunit residing in the plasma 
membrane (463, 649). In contrast to phagocytic NOX, vascular cells appear to maintain a 
portion of total NOX that is fully assembled and active in cell membranes, accounting for 
low level constitutive production of the ROS that subserve signaling functions, while a 
second pool is associated with cytoskeletal elements. Similar to phagocytic NOX, a third 
pool of vascular NOX subunits is not constitutively active because the enzyme constituents 
are sequestered in different cellular compartments until stimulation, which promotes their 
translocation and assembly into the holoenzyme (463, 649). A large body of evidence 
supports a role for both vascular wall and leukocyte NOXs in postischemic injury to cells of 
the vascular wall and organ parenchyma after exposure to I/R or anoxia-reoxygenation (463, 
649).
The microsomal mixed function oxidase cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes are best known 
for their role in xenobiotic metabolism by the liver, as well as catalyzing the univalent 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 24
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
oxidation or reduction of some lipids (e.g., arachidonic acid), vitamins, steroids, and 
cholesterol. However, it is now known that endothelial cells also express members of this 
family of membrane-bound, heme-containing oxidases (282, 296). Vascular CYPs catalyze 
the formation of eicosanoid derivatives from arachidonic acid, some of which produce 
vasoconstriction [20-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid 20-HETE)], while others produce 
vasodilation and/or exert anti-inflammatory effects [epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs)]. 
Thus, the role and importance of distinct CYP-derived products in I/R is complex, since 
these enzymes catalyze production of both anti-inflammatory EETs as well as harmful 
vasoconstrictors and ROS (180). Indeed, CYP-derived 20-HETE may contribute to I/R 
injury in the heart and brain, by a mechanism that involves formation of ROS and 
dihydroxydecanoic acid (131, 210, 302, 874). In sharp contrast, CYP-derived EETs have 
been shown to attenuate postischemic inflammatory responses (180, 302, 862).
NOS exists as three isoforms designated endothelial, neuronal, and inducible NOS. Each of 
these isotypes are dual-function oxidoreductase enzymes that require tetrahydrobiopterin 
(BH4) as an essential cofactor to shuttle electrons from molecular oxygen to L-arginine (L-
arg), a reaction that produces L-citrulline and NO. All NOSs can become uncoupled from 
NO production when BH4 or L-arg are absent, producing O2− instead of NO (212, 663). 
This uncoupling can also occur by dissociation of NOS from associated proteins (e.g., 
HSP90) that are necessary for coupled function, oxidation of BH4 secondary to 
overproduction of O2− or ONOO−, oxidation of the zinc-thiolate complex that stabilizes the 
NOS homodimer, or via S-glutathionylation (663). NOS uncoupling appears to be an 
important contributor to I/R injury, and can be reversed by administration of L-arg, BH4, or 
the BH4 precurser sepiaterin in animal models (212, 663, 708, 864).
In normal cells, mitochondria represent the major intracellular source of O2−, mainly due to 
“electron leak” at complex I (NADH ubiquinone oxidoreductase) and complex III 
(ubiquinone/cytochrome c reductase) in the electron transport chain (477, 633). It also 
appears that a significant proportion of I/R-induced ROS formation is derived from 
mitochondria (Fig. 8) because postischemic oxidant production, vascular dysfunction, and 
parenchymal cell injury are attenuated by treatment with inhibitors specific for steps in the 
electron transport chain, targeted delivery of antioxidants to mitochondria, and transgenic 
overexpression of mitochondrial versus cytosol-specific isoforms of antioxidant enzymes 
(e.g., MnSOD vs. CuZnSOD, respectively) (145, 146, 362, 477, 633, 745, 868). Recent work 
indicates that ischemic accumulation of succinate is a metabolic signature of ischemia and 
acts as an electron store in the absence of oxygen. This accumulation is propelled by purine 
nucleotide breakdown to fumarate during ischemia, which drives succinate dehydrogenase to 
operate in reverse, generating succinate, an effect that is magnified by partial reversal of the 
malate/aspartate shuttle in ischemia. Upon reperfusion, the accumulated succinate fuels ROS 
generation by reverse electron transport at mitochondrial complex I (145, 146). In addition 
to increased postischemic ROS production by this organelle, the bioavailability of 
mitochondrial oxidants is enhanced by I/R-induced reductions in mitochondrial antioxidant 
activities, which reduces the disposal or scavenging of ROS as they are produced (745).
Recent evidence indicates that sources other than the electron transport chain may be 
quantitatively important sources of mitochondrial ROS production in conditions 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 25
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
characterized by oxidative stress. These include two enzymes localized to the mitochondrial 
outer membrane, p66Shc and monoamine oxidase (MAO) (118, 194, 367, 790) (Fig. 8). The 
redox adaptor protein p66Shc is activated during reperfusion by phosphorylation of Ser 36, 
which promotes p66Shc translocation to the mitochondrial outer membrane, where it 
oxidizes cytochrome c, producing ROS in the process (29, 790, 868). Prevention of p66Shc 
phosphorylation and translocation to the outer mitochondrial membrane reduces 
postischemic myocardial damage (868). Intravenous injection of small interfering RNA 
targeting p66Shc reduced cerebral lesion volumes, preserved blood-brain-barrier integrity, 
decreased neurological deficits and improved survival in a murine stroke model and 
preserved claudin-5 levels in primary human brain microvascular endothelial cells exposed 
to hypoxia/reoxygenation (737). Genetic deletion of p66Shc also effectively reduces tissue 
injury and oxidative stress induced by hindlimb, myocardial, and cerebral I/R (118, 609, 
738, 897). Interestingly, the results of a more recent study indicates that larger infarct sizes 
occurred in mice genetically deficient in p66Shc and in p66Shc-silenced wild-type mice, as 
long as coronary occlusions did not exceed 30 min and infarct sizes were small (12). For 
longer occlusions, that p66Shc ablation did not confer protection.
The MAOs are another outer mitochondrial membrane enzyme that appears to be a 
prominent source of oxidants (Fig. 8). These enzymes normally function to oxidatively 
deaminate monoamine neurotransmitters and dietary tyramines, producing aldehydes and 
hydrogen peroxide (193, 194, 205). However, there is an emerging body of evidence 
indicating that MAOs also contribute to oxidative stress in cardiac I/R injury (70, 367, 408, 
409, 817).
Nitrosative stress in I/R
The formation of NO• is catalyzed by the action of NOS. This radical species can also be 
produced via the enzymatic reduction of nitrite or nitrate by XO (278, 831). Under hypoxic 
conditions, mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase also serves as a source of NO• (120). The 
half-life of this molecule is very short (a few seconds), owing to its high reactivity. Its 
evancescent nature, when coupled with its ability to readily cross cell membranes and the 
fact that the endothelial isoform of NOS (eNOS) produces NO• in relatively low quantities 
allows this radical species to be ideal signaling molecule under physiological conditions. As 
such, NO• plays an important regulatory role in the vasculature, where it acts as a 
vasodilator, modulates platelet aggregation and adhesion, prevents adhesive interactions 
between marginating leukocytes/platelets and the endothelium, and regulates angiogenesis 
(339, 615, 706). However, the physiology of NO• is quite complex because its high 
reactivity permits its interactions with a large number of biomolecules (97, 299, 463, 498, 
509, 615, 806).
NO• exerts both direct and indirect effects, depending on the rate of its production (299, 
463). Direct effects occur when this radical species is produced at low concentrations or 
fluxes, allowing NO to subserve a signaling function via interactions with its classic target 
guanylate cyclase as well as participating in the formation of nitrosylated lipids and proteins 
that regulate/modify cell function, and prevention of iron-dependent formation of ferryl-
heme radicals by H2O2 (719). Indirect effects are the result of interaction of NO with O2 or 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 26
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
O2−, which leads to the formation of dinitrogen trioxide (N2O3) or peroxynitrite (ONOO−), 
respectively. When generated at low concentrations, these secondarily derived RNOS 
participate in cell signaling. On the other hand, when N2O3 and ONOO− are produced at 
high rates during I/R pathophysiological nitrosative stress ensues.
Biologic targets of oxidative/nitrosative stress in I/R
As noted above, ROS and RNOS can attack cell proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids in 
postischemic tissues. However, work conducted in the last 15 years has led to the concept 
that simple damage to the structure of these macromolecules does not fully explain the 
deleterious effects of I/R-induced oxidative/nitrosative stress on cellular function. Indeed, it 
has become apparent that postischemic ROS/RNOS influence the function of regulatory and 
effector proteins involved in the response to I/R induces dysregulation of the network of 
thiol redox circuits in cells, as discussed later.
Cellular redox signaling in I/R
While the generation of ROS, RNS, and RNOS were once thought to be invariably 
deleterious, it is now abundantly clear that cellular mechanisms have evolved to exploit these 
reactive species in signaling cascades. Because of their potential for relatively indiscriminate 
reactivity with virtually all biomolecules in cells, their signaling specificity in radical-
mediated control systems occurs by mechanisms very different from the classical ligand-
receptor signaling paradigm (D’Autréaux, 2007). For example, it is now known that H2O2 
can influence specific signaling pathways by targeting thioldisulfide redox switches on 
thioredoxin proteins or by interacting with other regulatory/effector proteins (168, 398, 414). 
It has been proposed that influencing the switching of key redox-active cysteines between 
reduced thiol and oxidized disulfide forms on proteins that are compartmentalized allows 
H2O2 to participate in discrete, spatially and kinetically distinct signaling cascades (168, 
246, 273, 274, 334, 338, 398, 414).
Like H2O2, NO or RNOS can also react with cysteine or reduced glutathione, with this 
interaction producing S-nitrosothiols as the major path to influence cell signaling 
independent of the classical sGC-mediated path (498). Interestingly, when proteins are S-
nitrosylated, they typically produce protective responses via targeting a variety of cell 
surface receptors, the transcription factor NFκB, IκB kinase, PKC, apoptotic enzymes, 
PTPs, MnSOD, cytoskeletal actin, and mitochondrial complex I (248, 249, 275, 337, 338, 
498, 531, 643, 753, 842). A recently recognized system of denitrosylases (e.g., S-
nitrosoglutathione reductases and the thioredoxin system) provides exquisite control of the 
extent of S-nitrosylation, modulating the impact of interactions between NO or NO 
derivatives with thiols as well as redox signaling in general (65). The extent to which 
dysregulated S-nitrosylation/denitrosylation participate in I/R has not yet been examined.
Results of a recent study have challenged the widely held view that ROS production by 
mitochondria or other intracellular sources plays a key role in the pathogenesis of I/R injury 
(534). In an elegant series of experiments, it was shown that treatment with synthetic 
copolymer-based sarcolemmal stabilizers such as poloxamer 188 reduced postischemic 
necrosis, apoptosis, hypercontracture, and mitochondrial dysfunction without disrupting 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 27
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
intracellular oxidative stress or lipid peroxidation. Because the copolymers do not cross the 
sarcolemma, these findings suggest that intracellular targets of reactive oxygen species are 
not sufficiently disrupted to affect cell death when sarcolemmal integrity is preserved by 
synthetic stabilizers. As such, the results are consistent with the concept that postischemic 
oxidative stress is uncoupled from postischemic myocyte injury and supports the notion that 
I/R destabilizes the sarcolemma, resulting in disrupted regulation of intracellular Ca2+, as a 
major mechanism underlying postischemic myocardial injury. Further, these observations 
provide an attractive explanation for the failure of antioxidant therapies to limit postischemic 
tissue injury in clinical trials.
Endoplasmic reticulum stress in I/R
The ER is a complex membranous organelle that participates in regulating calcium 
homeostasis, lipid synthesis, and the folding of proteins (564). ER dysfunction occurs in 
response to a wide variety of insults and results in protein misfolding and unfolding in the 
organelle, a state referred to as ER stress. As these misfolded/unfolded proteins accumulate, 
they activate transmembrane receptors to induce the unfolded protein response (UPR) (564). 
The UPR functions to mitigate the accumulation of unfolded proteins by accelerating their 
degradation and by increasing the expression of chaperones in ER and promoting the 
formation of new proteins. However, cell death occurs by apoptosis when the UPR fails to 
relieve ER stress.
Proapoptotic pathways of the UPR are activated during reperfusion of ischemic tissues 
secondary to ROS generation and the liberation of proinflammatory cytokines (288, 564, 
736, 783, 785). On the other hand, the UPR activating transcription factor (ATF)6 system 
plays a role in cardioprotective effects. Indeed, cardiac-specific upregulation of ATF6 results 
in improved function and reduced cell death by necrosis and apoptosis following 
myocarcadial infarction, effects that were associated with increased expression of ER-
resident chaperones GRP78 and −98, (533). In sharp contrast, inhibitors targeting ATF6 
function have been shown to exacerbate postischemic cardiac contractile dysfunction and 
increased mortality (785). Mechanistically, ATF6 participates in the activation of several 
genes, including mesencephalic astrocyte-derived neurotrophic factor (MANF) and the ER 
stress response gene, Derlin-3, to produce these effects (61, 62, 760). Treatment with 
recombinant MANF reduced injury in cultured cardiomyocytes subjected to simulated I/R, 
while knockdown of MANF expression produced opposite effects (760). Similar protection 
was noted after overexpression of the Derlin-3 gene and other components of the UPR, and 
also appear to participate in the ER-stress reducing and infarct-sparing effects of ischemic 
pre- and postconditioning (61, 186, 514, 527). It is of interest to note that in addition to their 
other better-known therapeutic activities, AMPK activators (e.g., metformin), ischemic 
preconditioning and/or statins exert some of their cardioprotective effects via influencing the 
UPR (135, 198, 773).
Mitochondrial dysfunction contributes to I/R
Oxygen lack during low blood flow states inhibits the flow of electrons through the 
mitochondrial respiratory chain. As a result, ADP phosphorylation to ATP by the F1F0 
ATPase cannot occur (192, 303). Indeed, under these conditions of inhibited electron 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 28
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
transfer, the ATP synthase actually operates in a reverse mode (ATP hydrolase), hydrolyzing 
the little remaining ATP in an attempt to maintain Δψm (192, 572). As consequence of these 
two events, ATP levels decrease very rapidly when ischemia is induced. Interestingly, 
selective inhibition of mitochondrial F1F0 ATPase slows the rate of ATP loss during 
ischemia but improves restoration of cellular ATP levels on reperfusion and limits infarct 
size (303). Impaired oxidative phosphorylation induced by ischemia also inhibits the 
breakdown and/or oxidation of fatty acids (707). As toxic fatty acids accumulate within 
affected cells, they fuel inflammatory arachidonic acid metabolite generation (810) and 
promote mitochondrial PTP opening (195). Because mitochondrial bioenergetic changes are 
essential early warning signs for impending ischemic conditions, monitoring patient 
bioenergetic health index shows potential as a new biomaker (123).
As previously mentioned, mitochondria are important sources of oxidative stress in I/R, with 
excessive ROS being generated by the electron transport chain and the mitochondrial outer 
membrane proteins p66Shc and MAOs, and several other mitochondrial proteins including 
mitochondrial NOX4 (172, 406) (Fig. 8). Superoxide produced under physiologic conditions 
via complexes I and III of the electron transport chain under physiologic conditions is 
neutralized by SOD. However, the increased leakage of superoxide during ischemia, 
especially at complex I, overwhelms cellular antioxidant defenses (172, 477, 628, 729). 
Restoration of oxygen delivery when blood flow is reestablished further compounds these 
sequelae.
Several other mitochondrial ROS sources have been described, including α-ketoglutarate 
dehydrogenase (αKGDH), electron-transfer flavoprotein, pyruvate dehydrogenase, 
glycerophosphate dehydrogenase, and ROS modulator 1 (Romo1). There is evidence that 
αKGDH can be a major source of oxidants when the NADH/NAD ratio is high, as occurs in 
I/R. Indeed, increased phosphorylation of this enzyme has been reported in female rats, 
which reduces ROS generation by αKGDH by mitochondria and cardiomyocytes isolated 
from these animals after A/R, providing a potential explanation for the lower risk for 
cardiovascular disease in premenopausal females (464, 628). Roles for the other 
mitochondrial proteins mentioned above in I/R-induced ROS generation have not yet been 
studied. However, given the central role of TNF in I/R injury, it is tempting to speculate that 
ROS modulator 1 may play an important role in postischemic ROS generation by 
mitochondria because this recently described protein has been shown to link TNF signaling 
to apoptotic cell death via mitochondrial oxidant production (419, 420).
As described above, I/R-induced opening of the mitochondrial PTP is a final end effector in 
the plethora of events in the progression to cell death during reperfusion. This pore is 
quiescent during ischemia because it is inhibited by acidotic conditions. However, I/R-
induced mitochondrial Ca2+ overload coupled with the enormous increase in ROS 
production associated with the reintroduction of molecular oxygen cause the mitochondrial 
PTP to open (192–194, 603) (Fig. 8). Because of the open mitochondrial PTP is large, 
readily allowing molecules up to 1.5 kD in size to cross the channel, a massive flux of H+ 
ions pass back into the mitochondrial matrix, thereby dissipating the Δψm, uncoupling the 
electron transport chain and inhibiting ATP synthesis (37, 315). At the same time, water is 
driven osmotically into the organelle, causing excessive swelling that can proceed to rupture.
Kalogeris et al.
Page 29
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Although the protein constituents of the mitochondrial PTP and how they interact to control 
its permeability have not been definitely identified, adenine nucleotide translocase, 
mitochondrial phosphate carrier, and cyclophilin-D are leading structural candidates (13, 35, 
36, 316, 723). Despite this uncertainty, the development of cyclophilin-D inhibitors has 
allowed examination of the role of the mitochondrial PTP in I/R injury. Inhibition of this 
putative pore constituent has been shown to mitigate I/R-induced cell death (13, 149, 192, 
570, 646, 690, 723). The development of CypD-deficient mice and their use in I/R studies 
has confirmed the aforementioned pharmacologic inhibitor studies (39, 187, 693). 
Mitochondrial DNA is another target in I/R (77).
Mitochondria form intercommunicating tubular networks that are linked to the cytoskeleton 
and are tethered to the endoplasmic reticulum via a network of membrane contact sites. 
Recent work indicates that mitochondrial tubular networks provide a conductive pathway 
dependent on proton-motive force for ultrarapid energy distribution within the cell (269). In 
mammalian cells, the endoplasmic reticulum membrane contact sites with mitochondria are 
closely apposed (gap distance of 6–15 nm between ER and mitochondrial membranes), 
cover about 2% to 5% of mitochondrial surface area, and function to establish tethering 
domains that enable exchange of signals or metabolites (e.g., Ca2+ and lipids) between these 
organelles (635). These dynamic organelles also undergo cycles of division (fission) and 
fusion, processes that can become unbalanced in pathologic states to produce alterations in 
mitochondrial morphology and function (137). Large networks of fused mitochondria appear 
with loss of fission. On the other hand, excessive fission produces small, fragmented 
mitochondria, a requisite step for extrinsic apoptotic cell death. Since ischemia-induced 
reductions in ATP levels and increased mitochondrial ROS production promote fission of 
these organelles, the ensuing fragmentation of mitochondria contribute to postischemic 
apoptotic cell death. Moreover, inhibition of mitochondrial fission reduces I/R-induced 
mitochondrial fragmentation and prevents opening of the mitochondrial PTP (605). 
Postischemic endothelial dysfunction may also involve this mechanism, since H/R induces 
mitochondrial fission and fragmentation in cultured endothelial cells (268). It is interesting 
to note that ER membrane contact sites define the location of fission on mitochondria by 
controlling where fission machinery assembles (635). Although not yet explored in I/R, 
these results suggest that therapeutic targeting of membrane contacts sites to modulate 
mitochondrial fission/fusion may represent a novel approach for clinical cardioprotection in 
I/R.
Protein kinases play critical roles in the pathogenesis of I/R injury
These include the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), protein kinase Cδ (PKCδ), 
calcium calmodulin protein kinases (CaMK), and receptor-interacting protein (RIP) kinases. 
The MAPKs are a family of heterogeneous serine/threonine kinases that participate in cell 
growth, proliferation, survival, and death and include the extracellular signal-regulated 
kinases (ERKs), c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs), and the p38 MAPKs, with several 
isoforms and splice variants existing within each group. Since abundant evidence 
consistently supports a protective role for ERKs in the setting of I/R (327), we will focus on 
the roles of JNKs and p38 MAPKs in this section.
Kalogeris et al.
Page 30
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Evidence supporting a role of JNK in I/R is provided by the observations that: (i) JNK 
activation occurs in postischemic tissues, (ii) treatment with the selective JNK inhibitors or 
ablation of the Jnk2 and Jnk3 genes attenuate I/R injury in liver and brain, respectively, and 
(iii) JNK1- or JNK2-deficient mice exhibited infarct-sparing effects following I/R relative to 
wildtype animals (83, 404, 456, 571, 601, 778, 828, 850, 919). Although these data strongly 
support a critical role for JNKs in I/R injury, their participation in postischemic damage is 
complex and controversial because JNK activation has been shown to be just as protective in 
the heart as inactivation of the kinase (404). In addition, JNK inhibition has been shown to 
worsen I/R injury in the liver (479). The reasons underlying these discrepant observations 
are unclear.
Similar to JNKs, evidence in favor of a role for p38MAPK in I/R is equivocal. Supporting 
evidence includes the observations that p38 MAPKs are activated by I/R, while treatment 
with pharmacological p38 MAPKs inhibitors effectively reduces I/R-induced cell death 
(324, 431, 491, 494, 571, 637, 763, 917). However, it is also clear that preconditioning 
interventions confer protection against I/R injury by a mechanism that is dependent on p38 
MAPK activation (328, 896). The most likely explanation for these incongruent findings 
may lie in differential p38 MAPK isoform activation in I/R vs preconditioning since lethal 
I/R results in activation of the p38α isotype while preconditioning interventions activate the 
cytoprotective β isoform of p38 MAPK (173, 307, 403).
JNK and p38 MAPK activation also contribute to the pathogenesis of I/R injury through 
their effects to upregulate inflammatory cytokines (421, 684). These kinases, as well as 
PKCδ (see later), localize to mitochondria to activate death pathways (40, 305, 435, 919). 
This occurs by a mechanism involving p38- and JNK-dependent phosphorylation and 
inactivation of the antiapoptotic Bcl2 protein (174, 227) and phosphorylation-mediated 
activation of several other prodeath Bcl2 proteins (93, 200, 419, 483, 530, 560, 574, 724, 
922).
The PKC family includes at least 10 different isoforms (α, β1, β2, γ, δ, ε, η, θ, ζ, ι/, and 
λ). Of these diverse serine-threonine kinase isotypes, PKCδ and PKCε are the most 
important in the context of I/R, with the former playing an important role in I/R injury, while 
the latter is a major contributor in the cardioprotective mechanism underlying pre-and 
postconditioning (148, 172, 449, 721, 746). With regard to the role of PKCδ, translocation 
and activation of this isoform occurs in response to I/R (305, 443, 746). More importantly, 
Mochly-Rosen and coworkers designed peptide activators and inhibitors that specifically 
target PKCδ to dissect out the role of this specific isoform in the pathogenesis of reperfusion 
injury. Using these agents, this group and others demonstrated that I/R injury was 
ameliorated by targeted inhibition of PKCδ (93, 99, 144, 368, 447, 574), while transgenic 
expression of a PKCδ activator enhanced ischemic damage (136). It is of interest to note that 
PKCδ appears to play a role in myocardial, α1-adrenergic, and exercise preconditioning in 
the rat, but not in some other species (99, 552).
A role for CaMK in postischemic myocardial injury was postulated because I/R results in 
cellular calcium overload and large increases in cytosolic Ca2+ can activate these enzymes. 
Thus, it was not surprising that activation and translocation of CaMK-II isoform was noted 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 31
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
in ischemic hearts (583, 798). Subsequent and indeed more compelling work showed that 
inhibition of CaMK-II attenuates cell dysfunction and death induced by I/R (816, 909).
The RIP kinases (briefly discussed earlier under section “Necrosis versus regulated 
necrosis”) normally function to regulate the NF-kB and ERK signaling pathways that are 
activated by ligation of receptors in the TNF family (240) but are also critical for the 
progression of regulated necrotic death in response to stressful stimuli (141, 175, 176, 234, 
349). With regard to I/R, treatment with a specific inhibitor of RIP1 called necrostatin was 
shown to reduce postischemic infarct size (175, 176, 593, 670, 726). Similar results were 
recently demonstrated in RIP3-deficient mice, where it was also shown that RIP3 induced 
the activation of CaMKII via phosphorylation at Thr287 in response to I/R (909). This study 
also established that I/R-induced, RIP3-dependent, CaMKII activation to induce necroptosis 
occurred by a ROS-dependent mechanism involving oxidation of CaMKII at Met281 and 
Met282 (221). Cerebral I/R also involves RIP3 activation by a mechanism that involves 
NMDA receptor-mediated calcium influx to activate nNOS (562). Consequent NO 
production results in RIP3 S-nitrosylation at Cys119 to facilitate its activation to promote 
necroptosis of cerebral neurons after I/R.
Downstream molecular targets of CaMKII and RIP kinases that couple I/R to cell death are 
not well defined. However, it is known that L-type Ca2+ channels and Na+ channels are 
phosphorylated and thus activated by CaMK-II (303, 819, 820). These effects enhance the 
huge influx of Ca2+ associated with I/R. CaMK also acts to enable Ca2+ release from cardiac 
SR (835), thereby contributing to calcium overload in myocardial I/R. In contrast, RIP 
kinases induce ROS production (562, 567) and increase intracellular levels of the death-
inducing lipid, ceramide (781).
Epigenetic Changes Contribute to I/R Injury
Epigenetic changes refer to transmissible variations in phenotypic traits that are caused by 
external or environmental factors that switch genes on and off and affect how cells read 
genes instead of being caused by changes in DNA sequence of the genes. In the next three 
sections, we review the three main ways by which genes are epigenetically regulated—DNA 
methylation, histone modification, and noncoding RNAs, and how epigenetic changes 
contribute to the pathogenesis of I/R.
DNA methylation
DNA methylation is enzymatically catalyzed by DNA methyl-transferases and causes 
chromatin condensation, which interferes with transcriptional activator binding to the DNA 
and silencing of transcription (147, 579). DNA demethylation can also occur, resulting in 
enhanced gene expression. One of the first studies to implicate DNA methylation in I/R was 
conducted by Endres and colleagues (217, 218), who showed that stroke increased the 
content of methylated DNA in affected brain. In subsequent work, the same group showed 
that reductions in DMNT levels conferred protection in cerebral I/R injury (216). More 
recently, it has been shown that the temporal profiles of DNA methylation with respect to 
chromatin hyper- and hypomethylation following various ischemic conditions are highly 
dynamic (553). A catalog of specific gene targets for methylation in I/R is emerging. As one 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 32
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
example, ischemia-induced DNA methylation silenced endothelial thrombospondin-1 gene 
expression (356). Another report indicates that the cardioprotective PKCε gene is silenced 
by chronic cocaine exposure-induced methylation, which may account for enhanced I/R 
injury associated with abuse of this substance (561). Ischemia can also lead to demethylation 
and thus activation of genes that contribute to injury. For example, stroke-induced 
demethylation of the Na+-K+-2Cl− cotransporter type 1 gene (476) and increased expression 
of this transporter may contribute to postischemic brain edema (402).
Histone modifications
Epigenetic gene expression is also regulated by histone modifications, which can occur by 
methylation, acetylation, phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and sumoylation (147, 920). 
Acetylation-induced histone modification is a prominent regulator of gene expression in I/R. 
It is catalyzed by histone acetyltransferases and reversed by HDACs. This was first reported 
over 30 years ago in a study noting that cardiac ischemia caused a large decrease in histone 
acetylation, which was most prominent in histones H3 and H4 (771). Similar reductions 
have been detected in ischemic brain (654). Subsequent work demonstrated that ischemia 
induces HDAC activity, providing a mechanistic underpinning for the observed reduction in 
H3/4 acetylation. Based on such observations, it was hypothesized that maintaining histone 
acetylation would exert cardioprotective effects. Indeed, HDACs inhibition increased histone 
acetylation, resulting in reduced I/R injury (165, 289, 418, 654, 754, 771, 854). Similarly, 
treatment of cultured cardiac myocytes with siRNA targeting HDAC4 confers protection in 
an in vitro model of ischemic injury (288). Initial work has identified several 
cardioprotective genes that are upregulated by histone acetylation to induce protection 
including heat shock proteins, hypoxia-inducible factor-1α, caspases, Bcl2, and several 
survival kinases (Akt, ERK, AMPK, and p21) (9, 33, 229, 288, 418, 586). An increasing 
body of evidence implicates another HDAC, silent information regulator 1 or SIRT1, as a 
protective protein in cerebral ischemia (871). Although it remains unclear whether histone 
ubiquitination or sumolyation play important roles in modifying gene expression in response 
to I/R, it has been shown that aortic cross-clamping in humans increased phosphorylation of 
histone H2AX (157).
Noncoding RNAs
Several specific families of noncoding RNAs (ncRNA) have been described, including long 
ncRNAs, piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNA), and short RNAs, especially microRNAs 
(miRNA) (147, 159). Long ncRNAs are largely directed at genetic imprinting while piRNAs 
exert effects that are primarily involved in genomic maintenance, and thus will not be 
discussed here. Rather, we focus attention on short RNAs, especially microRNAs (miRNA) 
that are too short (19–25 nucleotides) in length to encode proteins. However, they function 
to censor gene expression by repressing mRNA translation or by inducing mRNA 
degradation. As a consequence, miRNAs have the potential to participate in the pathogenesis 
of I/R injury (86, 162, 277, 281, 297, 492, 517, 688, 691, 866, 887, 894). In addition to 
regulating the expression of mRNAs and thus protein expression within cells, miRNAs can 
also be secreted to the extracellular compartment, as can ribosomal RNA. These 
extracellular RNAs adversely affect outcomes in I/R by acting as damage-associated 
molecular patterns (DAMPs) and as cofactors for activation of inflammatory cascades and 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 33
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
thrombosis (899). Indeed, myocardial I/R is associated with significant release of RNA, 
including several miRNAs, primarily by cardiac myocytes, although endothelial cells, 
fibroblasts, and vascular smooth muscle cells also contribute (105, 133). Importantly, these 
studies also showed that treatment with RNAase1 reduced TNFα shedding, oxidant 
production, cardiomyocyte hypercontracture, LDH release, and infarct size in hearts 
subjected to I/R. Another general characteristic of ischemia-induced miRNAs is that their 
expression profiles are highly variable, depending on the duration of ischemia 
(preconditioning vs. index ischemia), cell type, or at what time point after blood flow is re-
established their expression pattern is studied (1, 230, 252, 459, 695, 767, 879).
Recent work has revealed that the expression of key molecules involved in cell survival and 
apoptosis (e.g., Bcl-2, FasL, HSP20, HSP60, HSP70, LRRFIP1, Mcl-1, Pdcd4, PI3K, 
PTEN, and SIRT-1) are altered by miRNA expression in I/R (Fig. 9). MiRNA expression 
profiling has been used to uncover differential regulation of several miRNAs in different 
organs following I/R to modulate gene function involved in cardiac cell death, 
arrhythmogenesis, fibrosis and extracellular matrix remodeling, and angiogenesis (276, 296, 
388, 674, 858, 894). As this emerging body of evidence implicates causal roles of specific 
miRNAs in postischemic tissue injury, approaches to block miRNA function are being 
avidly pursued. One such approach to interfere with miRNA function relates to the 
development of single stranded RNA analogs that are complementary to miRNAs but have 
been modified to confer stability and enhance delivery, while retaining their target specificity 
(455).
Ischemia or hypoxia markedly increase the expression of miRNA-1 which acts to promote 
apoptosis (by targeting Bcl-2, HSP-60, and HSP-70 gene expression) and arrhythmias 
(through effects on the expression of the potassium channel subunit kir2.1 and connexin-43, 
a major component of gap junctions) (68, 230, 252, 459, 550, 613, 695, 767, 879) (Fig. 9). 
Use of short, locked nucleic acid-based antimiRs has uncovered roles for miRNA-15 and 
themiRNA-34 family in cardiac necrosis induced by I/R (66, 363). On the other hand, 
downregulation of prosurvival miRNAs (e.g., miRNA–21) also contributes to cell death 
during ischemia. However, miRNA-21 recovers within two days of reperfusion where it 
functions to enhance MMP-2 expression and promote fibrosis. Collagen deposition in 
postischemic heart also occurs at this time point in reperfusion, an effect regulated by 
downregulated expression of miRNA-29 expression. Overexpression of miRNAs targeting 
prosurvival genes, such as the anti-apoptotic miRNA-378, limits myocyte necrosis after 
ischemia (228). As summarized in Figure 9, the expression of a plethora of other miRNAs 
occurs during I/R, where they influence a number of pathologic processes in postischemic 
tissues (43, 86, 417, 688, 703, 767, 877, 887).
In addition to their demonstrated role in cell death, arrhythmogenesis, stroke, acute kidney 
injury, extracellular matrix remodeling, and angiogenesis, miRNAs also influence 
development of atherosclerotic lesions, oxidative stress levels, inflammatory processes, and 
endothelial senescence (364, 524, 547, 647, 801, 908). An emerging body of evidence 
indicates that miRNA-mediated gene silencing also contributes to endothelial dysfunction, 
platelet dysfunction, and leukocyte recruitment in tissues exposed to I/R, with differential 
expression patterns varying with duration and extent of ischemia, reperfusion, and the 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 34
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
presence of coexisting risk factors (355, 517, 550, 613, 888). What is not yet clear is how 
changes in epigenetics, bioenergetics, and microRNA expression profiles link to 
coordinately reprogram the temporal expression of inflammatory genes during the phase 
shifts (recognition, initiation, adaptation, and resolution) that occur over the course of 
inflammatory responses in the setting of I/R.
Because miRNAs are present in the blood after I/R, there is growing interest in their use as 
biomarkers for cardiovascular disease (1, 280, 459, 492, 517). Circulating miRNAs may 
arise as a result of release from dead cells or by active secretion as protein-miRNA 
complexes or in membrane-bound apoptotic bodies, exosomes, and/or microvesicles that 
protect the noncoding miRNAs and account for their remarkable stability in plasma. 
Expression profiling of circulating miRNAs will likely reveal patterns that improve 
assessment of risk, diagnosis, and prognosis in persons suffering from ischemic disorders. 
Indeed, increases in cardiac troponin I, a classic marker for cardiac ischemic injury, correlate 
very well with alterations in miRNA-208a. Unlike other miRNAs that increase after cardiac 
I/R, miRNA-208a does not increase after kidney or skeletal muscle damage, pointing to use 
of this non-coding mRNA as a specific marker of myocardial I/R. In addition, because 
circulatingmiRNA-208a is not eliminated by the kidney, whereas cardiac troponin I 
undergoes renal excretion, this particular miRNA may be better biomarker for acute 
myocardial infarction in patients with concomitant end-stage renal disease. With regard to 
risk stratification, analysis of a unique signature pattern of 20 miRNAs from whole genome 
miRNA expression profiles predicted acutemyocardial infarction with a specificity of 96%, a 
sensitivity of 90%, and an accuracy of 93% (862). Several recent studies also point to the 
potential utility of miRNA expression patterns for prognostic utility after MI (188, 189, 280, 
541, 542, 923). However, we are not aware that any attempt to identify unique miRNA 
biosignatures relevant for prediction of responses to particular therapies in individual 
patients has been attempted. Nonetheless, the enormous strides in the application of 
precision medicine to inform prognosis and guide treatment in cancer patients should 
provide a strong impetus for discovering biomarker signatures that allow for therapeutic 
management of ischemic disease that is tailored to the individual patient.
Inflammation Plays a Prominent Role in the Reperfusion Component of 
Total Tissue Injury in I/R
Because I/R in most organs occurs in the absence of microorganisms, the invoked 
inflammatory response has been termed sterile inflammation. However, the inflammatory 
responses to I/R are similar to those invoked by invading pathogens. Both are characterized 
by recruitment of neutrophils and other leukocytes to the affected tissue site, coincident with 
the production of cytokines, chemokines, and other proinflammatory stimuli that serve as 
directional cues (249, 310, 372, 446, 463). Leukocyte trafficking to ischemic sites occurs 
primarily during reperfusion and involves 11 distinct steps (594–596, 816a, 923a, see Fig. 
10). Step 1: Margination. As neutrophils exit capillaries and enter the larger diameter 
postcapillary venular segment of the microcirculation, hydrodynamic forces move 
granulocytes from the center stream of flowing blood to the endothelial wall (margination). 
Step 2: Tethering and rolling. If appropriate adhesion molecules are expressed on activated 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 35
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
endothelial cells and the marginated neutrophil, as occurs during I/R, granulocytes are 
captured (tethered) by adhesion molecules expressed on both cell types that mediate rolling 
of the leukocyte along the vessel wall. Step 3: Slow rolling. The rolling neutrophil monitors 
its local environment for the presence of activating factors that promote adhesion molecule 
expression, thereby enabling the leukocyte to further slow its rolling behavior by forming 
more weak adhesive interactions that are mediated by the selectins. As the cells roll along 
and interact with P-selectin on the endothelial surface, excess membrane on the surface of 
neutrophils is pulled out into long nanotubes (microvilli) that form tethers at the rear of the 
rolling leukocyte. These tethers eventually detach as the cell continues to roll, but do not 
retract. Instead, they persist and are slung in front of the rolling leukocyte, to interact again 
with P-selectin. The membranous nanotube is now referred to as a sling, which the 
neutrophil rolls over to again be retarded in its movement down the vessel wall as the sling 
transitions to a tethering function. Step 4: Firm or stationary adhesion. By establishing 
strong adhesive interactions mediated by integrin-dependent interactions with endothelial 
ICAM-1 that are upregulated by chemokines, the slowly rolling leukocyte progresses to firm 
(stationary) adhesion. Step 5: Luminal crawling. Integrin-ICAM-1-dependent adhesion 
activates intracellular signaling pathways that induce cytoskeletal changes and polarization 
of the cell that lead to luminal motility. The crawling neutrophils move preferentially along 
interendothelial junctions in search of preferred routes for diapedesis and are often observed 
moving against the direction of flow in this exploration. Step 6: Transendothelial cell 
migration. Neutrophils cross the endothelial cell barrier by traversing interendothelial 
junctions at preferential sites that overlie areas in the basement membrane that exhibit low 
matrix protein (Pr−) deposition. Occasionally, inflammatory phagocytes cross the endothelial 
barrier by moving through cells in a transcellular route. Step 7: Abluminal crawling. Once 
through the endothelium, the diapedesing neutrophils crawl abluminally along pericyte 
processes, interacting with basement membrane structures at the same time, with both 
attachment events mediated by adhesion molecules. Step 8: Penetration of pericyte gaps and 
regions of low matrix protein expression in the basement membrane. Abluminally crawling 
neutrophils breach the pericyte layer where gaps between these cells exist, which coincide 
with regions of low matrix protein deposition (depicted as a lighter shade of green) in the 
basement membrane. These steps occur more or less simultaneously and use different 
adhesion molecules to propel the leukocyte through these barriers. Steps 9 and 10: 
Detachment from the vessel wall and migration through the interstital matrix. Continued 
migration of the diapedesing leukocyte into the tissue space requires its detachment from 
components of the vessel wall, which involves release of pseudopodial extensions from their 
sites of attachment to basement membrane components and adhesion receptors on pericytes 
and endothelial cells. Once this is achieved, the leukocyte follows directional cues provided 
by a chemotactic gradient and migrates through the tissue space toward inflammatory foci. 
Step 11: Attachment to and attack on parenchymal cells. Migrating neutrophils release their 
cytotoxic arsenal (ROS, MPO, and hydrolytic enzymes) in proximity to both functional and 
damaged parenchymal cells to cause injury. These phagocytic cells can also establish 
adhesive interactions with parenchymal cells, which is associated with increased detection of 
oxidants in the intracellular compartment where they produce injury in a highly 
compartmented manner.
Kalogeris et al.
Page 36
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Leukocyte sequestration increases markedly during reperfusion, when oxygen and blood-
borne immune cells are reintroduced to the tissues. While required to support cellular 
metabolism, which should rescue ischemic tissue, the influx of oxygen in the reperfusing 
blood serves as a requisite substrate for enzymatic ROS formation by XO and NADPH 
oxidase. Neutrophil sequestration into previously ischemic tissues occurs secondary to 
release of danger signals from necrotic cells and formation of mediators that promote 
adhesive interactions between these innate immune cells and postcapillary venules followed 
by their emigration into the tissues. Once sequestered in ischemic tissues, activated 
neutrophils produce a NADPH oxidase-dependent respiratory burst, release hydrolytic 
enzymes, generate highly injurious hypochlorous acid and N-chloramines via the enzymatic 
activity of MPO, and secrete pore-forming molecules to produce extensive collateral damage 
to vascular and parenchymal cells. By these mechanisms, infiltrating neutrophils induce 
reperfusion injury that amplifies the cellular damage initiated by ischemia (87, 245, 249, 
290, 310, 463).
A large number of pathologic processes contribute to I/R-induced leukocyte infiltration. For 
example, proinflammatory mediator formation and adhesion molecule expression on the 
surface of leukocytes and postcapillary venular endothelium are provoked by the 
postischemic oxidant generation. In addition to these effects, NO, a potent anti-adhesive 
signaling molecule, is quenched by I/R-induced ROS formation. The bioavailabilty of NO is 
further reduced by the decline in endothelial NOS activity associated with I/R. Postischemic 
oxidation of NO’s primary downstream signaling target, soluble guanylyl cylase, renders it 
less responsive to this antiadhesive molecule (397). At the same time, activation of tissue-
resident mast cells and macrophages occurs and these inflammatory cells release a variety of 
other mediators (e.g., TNFα IL-1 and other cytokines, angiotensin II, PAF, and LTB4) to 
further promote leukocyte-endothelial cell adhesive interactions. Platelet activation is also 
induced by I/R, which also plays an important role in facilitating leukosequestration in 
postischemic tissues.
As the adherent leukocytes emigrate into the tissues, they disrupt microvascular barrier 
function during their transit, leading to edema formation and increased diffusion distance for 
oxygen and nutrients. The latter problem is exacerbated by the development of postischemic 
capillary no-reflow, a leukocyte-dependent nutritive perfusion failure, and endothelium-
dependent vasoregulatory dysfunction in arterioles. It is important to emphasize that 
leukocyte-endothelial cell adhesive interactions, which precipitate the microvascular 
complications and tissue injury induced by reperfusion, are one of the earliest signs of tissue 
dysfunction and injury elicited by I/R (310, 463).
Humoral mediators, cytokines, and complement in I/R
Activation of the complement cascade, a complex reaction scheme that involves 
approximately 30 soluble and membrane-bound proteins, occurs via classical, alternative, 
and mannose-binding lectin pathways. Each of these three distinct pathways for complement 
activation participate in the pathogenesis of I/R injury by directing the formation of a 
membrane attack complex in plasma membranes that leads to cell lysis. In addition, 
complement activation provides signals that recruit and activate neutrophils and 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 37
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
macrophages to ischemic tissues. Indeed, the observation that chemotactic activity noted in 
untreated aliquots of lymph (a surrogate for interstitial fluid) draining postischemic tissues 
can be abolished by addition of a neutralizing antibody directed against C5a strongly 
supports the notion that complement activation promotes neutrophil infiltration in I/R (73, 
202).
That I/R could trigger activation of the complement cascade was first described by Hill and 
Ward (340) almost 50 years ago. Subsequent studies demonstrated increased expression for 
all of the classical complement cascade proteins in ischemic tissues (804, 876). Postischemic 
complement activation is triggered by release of subcellular membrane consistuents 
secondary to cell necrosis (127, 248, 461, 672). Complement depletion or treatment with 
function-blocking antibodies that target specific proteins in the cascade have proven to be 
very effective in limiting postischemic inflammation and tissue injury, and constitute some 
of the strongest evidence supporting a role for complement cascade in I/R (76, 167, 251, 
522, 530, 739, 795, 838, 845, 904). The lectin pathway for complement activation has also 
been implicated in the pathogenesis of myocardial, cerebral, and renal I/R (281, 627). 
Interestingly, mice deficient in the alternative pathway protein factor B or treated with a 
chemical alternative pathway inhibitor demonstrated improved outcomes in a stroke model, 
as did mice deficient in both the classical and lectin pathways (213). However, mice 
deficient in C6, a component of the membrane attack complex were not protected. These 
observations led to the conclusion that activation of the alternative pathway in stroke 
participates in amplifying the complement cascade to propagate cerebral injury but does so 
by a mechanism that does not involve the membrane attack complex (213).
In contrast to the invariably deleterious effects of complement activation in I/R, cytokines 
may exert pro- or anti-inflammatory effects in postischemic tissues, the net effect being 
related to what particular mediators are produced, where they are released and at what time 
during ischemia or reperfusion they appear, and how much of each mediator is produced. 
Although an enormous number of studies have been directed at uncovering the expression 
profiles for cytokines produced during the various phases of I/R, tumor necrosis factor-α 
(TNFα), and to a lesser extent interleukin-1, have emerged at center stage in the 
orchestration of mediator responses to I/R in most tissues. Macrophages are a major source 
of TNFα in I/R, but this cytokine is also produced by a number of other cell types. This 
cytokine acts as a paracrine meditor in eliciting localized responses but also enters the 
circulation at sufficient concentrations to exert effects at distant sites. TNFα binding to its 
specific receptors results in activation of NFκB and other transcription factors, chemokine 
expression, ROS formation, and the expression of adhesion molecules. These activities 
stimulate the recruitment and activation of neutrophils in postischemic tissues.
Endogenous danger signals and I/R
When ischemic cells undergo necrosis, cell membranes rupture, releasing ATP, heat-shock 
proteins, S100 proteins, and other stimuli that are normally shielded from the immune 
system by their intracellular location. The release of these danger signals, also collectively 
referred to as damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), into the extracellular 
compartment is detected by other proteins called pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), [one 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 38
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
important example being the toll-like receptors (TLRs)]. When DAMPs bind to cell surface 
TLRs, a number of transcription factors (e.g., NF-κB) are activated to promote the 
upregulation of proteins involved in activation of innate immune responses (496, 543, 548, 
764). As an example, release of intracellular ATP from necrotic cells activates the NLRP3 
inflammasome, which in turn functions to induce neutrophil infiltration into ischemic tissues 
(548, 764).
Cell Types Involved in Postischemic Inflammation
In addition to parenchymal cells, endothelial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells, neurons, 
platelets, and several immune cells subtypes are also affected by and contribute to the 
pathophysiology of I/R injury. In patients surviving acute ischemic events, fibroblasts play a 
role in remodeling the extracellular matrix and scar formation in the affected organ, but this 
will not be reviewed herein. Because inflammatory responses contribute to much of the 
reperfusion component of total tissue injury in I/R, we focus on the endothelium and 
immunocytes, both circulating and and those residing in the tissues, and how these cells 
interact to produce postischemic damage.
Endothelial cells
The endothelial cells lining blood vessels walls constitute a significant proportion of the 
different cell types in each tissue, representing 3% to 5% of myocardial volume but 
outnumbering (~45% of the total cells) other cell types in murine ventricles, as well as 
comprising more than 60% of the nonmyocytes in the myocardium (576). This abundance 
suggests that endothelial cells play an even larger role in normal cardiac physiology and the 
heart’s response to injury than assumed previously. I/R compromises endothelial barrier 
function, promotes adhesion of immune cells to and emigration across postcapillary venular 
endothelium, disrupts endothelium-dependent vasodilation, and control of endothelial 
hemostasic mechanisms. In addition, narrowing the capillary lumens occurs secondary to 
I/R-induced endothelial cell swelling, which facilitates the entrapment of neutrophils in 
these minute vessels, thereby contributing to the development of postischemic no-reflow. 
The mechanisms underlying each of these deficits in endothelial cell function will be 
summarized next, with the exception of leukocyte/endothelial cell adhesive interactions, as 
they were discussed in the section on inflammation earlier.
Microvascular permeability changes in I/R—A single layer of endothelial cells are 
arranged circumferentially around the inner lining of all blood vessels. These cells comprise 
an effective barrier to the movement of solutes and fluid from the blood stream into 
underlying tissues of most organs, while production of NO and other anti-adhesive 
molecules (H2S, CO, and adenosine) maintain a nonthrombogenic and anti-inflammatory 
phenotype under normal conditions. The integrity of intercellular junctional complexes 
between adjacent endothelial cells determine the porosity of this barrier. I/R disrupts both 
tight and adherens junctions in endothelial cells (460, 551). An impressive variety of 
proinflammatory mediators are released during I/R including ROS, chemokines (e.g., 
RANTES (regulated upon activation, normal T-cell expressed, and secreted), cytokines (e.g., 
TNF and IL-1), tachykinins (e.g., substance P), growth factors [e.g., vascular endothelial 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 39
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
growth factor (VEGF)], and proteases (e.g., MMPs) as well as low molecular weight factors 
(e.g., histamine, PAF, and LTB4). These mediators activate cell signaling mechanisms to 
provoke phosphorylation of junctional components, their internalization/degradation, and/or 
their connections to cytoskeletal elements, with the end result being dissolution of 
intercellular junctions and increased microvascular permeability, events associated with 
leukosequestration (8, 15, 460, 551, 662, 774). Recent work indicates that chemoattractants 
increase microvascular permeability by inducing TNF release from adherent neutrophils 
when they are in close proximity to endothelial junctions (241). The formation of 
intercellular junctional gaps involve calcium-dependent phosphorylation of myosin light 
chain kinase and cytoskeletal contraction (460) and also arise via influences on a redox 
sensor, tricellulin, that is localized to tight junction elements at three-cell endothelial 
contacts (158). In addition to granulocytes, CD4+ T lymphocytes are also capable of 
inducing endothelial barrier disruption and increased permeability, which appears to be 
related to their participation in neutrophil recruitment (512).
Leukocyte/endothelial cell interactions in postcapillary venules—The 
sequestration and infiltration into the tissues by PMNs and other immunocytes is a hallmark 
of I/R. Endothelial cells play a central role in this process, influencing a sequence of events 
that are both complex and highly dynamic. Leukosequestration begins with white cells 
forming adhesive interactions with the endothelium lining postcapillary venules, followed by 
their egress through the endothelium and subjacent basement membrane, and subsequent 
migration into the tissue spaces as they track directional cues released from damaged cells 
and accessory immunocytes such as mast cells. The mechanisms underlying these 
characteristic responses to I/R were depicted in Figure 4 and described in detail earlier.
I/R disrupts endothelium-dependent vasomotor control mechanisms in 
arterioles—I/R induces endothelium-dependent vasomotor control dysfunction as well as 
activation of vasoconstrictor mechanisms (286, 908). Endothelium-dependent vasodilator 
responses are impaired in postischemic tissues because the bioavailability of NO is reduced 
by several pathologic mechanisms. First, expression and activity of eNOS are reduced (908). 
Second, NO is effectively scavenged as a result of postischemic increases in TNFα-induced 
ROS production (908). A third cause of reduced bioavailability of NO relates to increased 
competition for the eNOS substrate, arginine, by arginase (335). Fourth, reductions in the 
eNOS cofactor dihydrobiopterin impairs NO production (784). The latter results in eNOS 
uncoupling, wherein the enzyme produces superoxide instead of NO.
On the other hand, endothelin production by the endothelium is enhanced by I/R, leading to 
vasoconstriction, inhibition of NO production, capillary no-reflow, and activation of 
inflammatory cells (28, 439, 821). Through these effects and other mechanisms, endothelin 
contributes to postischemic cell death and is arrhythmogenic in the heart. In view of these 
actions, it is surprising that exogenous administration of this vasoconstrictor prior to I/R is 
cardioprotective. This is consistent with the concept of hormesis, wherein mildly noxious 
stimuli induce preconditioning, while greater intensity provocations induce injury.
I/R induces a thrombogenic phenotype in endothelial cells—Under normal 
conditions, the endothelium participates in the control of hemostasis, maintaining an 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 40
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
antithrombotic state, via effects to prevent platelet adhesion and aggregation. However, this 
is reversed after I/R owing to reductions in bioavailability of endothelial NO (see earlier) 
and production of prothrombogenic mediators such as PAF. As a consequence, 
vasoconstriction ensues as does platelet activation, which culminates in increased adhesion 
of platelets to the endothelium and to each other or to leukocytes to form homotypic or 
heterotypic aggregates, respectively. The adhesion and aggegretory effects are due to 
increased surface expression of P-selectin, loss of NO/cGMP-mediated regulation of platelet 
calcium levels, and ligation of platelet surface integrin glycoprotein (GP) IIb–IIIa with 
fibrinogen, resulting in increased platelet aggregation (51, 499, 638). Increased surface 
expression of endothelial tissue factor is also induced by I/R. This pathologic event activates 
clotting factors and the formation of microthrombi, which may participate in the 
development of capillary no-reflow (51, 589, 780).
Neutrophils
Ischemia is associated with relatively modest increases in the numbers of leukocytes 
interacting with the blood vessel wall, which progressively increase with ischemic duration. 
Within minutes of reestablishing the blood supply to an ischemic organ, the number of 
rolling and adherent leukocytes, which are primarily neutrophils, increases dramatically. 
These adhesive events occur almost exclusively in postcapillary venules and precipitate 
enhanced transmigration of these inflammatory phagocytes into the tissue spaces (310, 460, 
463). Upon becoming firmly adherent, the flowing blood exerts a directional force that 
causes the leukocyte to adopt a more flattened, tear-drop morphology, which allows the 
adhesive cell to better withstand the anti-adhesive effects imposed by the flowing blood as 
well as increasing the surface area for contact between the immunocyte and the endothelium. 
This is accompanied by a directional redistribution and polarization of signaling, adhesion, 
cytoskeletal and receptor proteins toward the leading edge of the cells, permitting the 
leukocyte to extend pseudopods. The immunocytes use these structures to crawl along the 
endothelium, usually along the interendothelial junctions. Recent work has shown that 
adherent neutrophils migrate along the endothelium following a gradient of directional cues 
provided by chemoattractants derived from damaged and dying cells. This allows 
intravascular homing of the leukocyte to foci of injury before they are allowed to diapedese 
(548). In addition, it now appears that crawling leukocytes can sense that they have 
encountered sites along the junction that are permissive for transmigration between 
endothelial cells, and diapedesis occurs. These permissive sites occur at regions of low 
expression of basement membrane constituents which also overlie gaps in the pericyte layer 
surrounding postcapillary venules. Once they cross these barriers and are recruited to the 
tissue space, PMNs secrete a host of factors known to contribute to tissue injury. These 
include ROS, MPO-generated hypochlorous acid, a large number of cytokines and 
chemokines, proteases such as MMPs and elastase, and lipid mediators such as LTB4 and 
perhaps chlorinated fatty acids (662).
Transmigration across the endothelium may occur by paracellular movement between 
adjacent endothelial cells or transcellular progression through individual endothelial cells, 
with the former pathway representing the most common route in I/R (117, 548, 594, 595). 
Recent advances in the use of multicolor fluorescence spinning disk and multiphoton 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 41
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
confocal intravital microscopic imaging have shown that once the inflammatory phagocytes 
pierce the endothelial barrier and subendothelial matrix, they migrate along pericytes to exit 
the vascular wall at regions of low matrix deposition in the basement membrane that are also 
characterized by gaps between pericytes (594, 595, 644, 741). Once in the subendothelial 
space, neutrophils are guided by pericyte cues to enter and move through the interstitium by 
a mechanism dependent on actin polymerization and on matrix metalloproteinase 
(MMP)activity but without degradation of pericellular collagen (486). Reverse migration of 
neutrophils away from sites of injury and inflammation has also been described, but the 
pathophysiologic relevance of this response has not been evaluated in I/R (98, 596).
Postischemic tissue injury is significantly reduced by neutrophil depletion, treatment with 
immunoneutralizing antibodies directed against adhesion molecules, and in mice genetically 
deficient in adhesion molecules, results which provide the strongest evidence for a role for 
neutrophils in I/R (309, 335, 378, 385, 446, 602, 658, 667). Although neutrophils appear to 
be the major immunocyte contributing to injury occurring in the first hours of reperfusion, 
other inflammatory cells, such as macrophages, lymphocytes, mast cells, and platelets are 
now known to influence neutrophil sequestration (662).
Lymphocytes
For many years, work directed at uncovering the role of inflammation in I/R injury was 
directed almost exclusively at components of innate immunity including neutrophils, the 
complement system, postischemic release of proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines and 
other mediators, and tissue-resident sentinels such as mast cells. This emphasis on innate 
immune contributions was probably driven by the acute nature of most experimental models 
of I/R. However, recent unequivocal demonstrations of the importance of T and B 
lymphocytes [and dendritic cells (DCs), see later] in postischemic tissue injury has 
established a role for the adaptive immune system in I/R (102, 347, 348, 502, 886). This is 
consistent with the emerging concept that the innate and adaptive immune systems share 
reciprocal regulatory activities (410).
There is significant accumulation of CD4+ T cells in postischemic tissues, suggesting that 
these immunocytes may participate in the pathogenesis of I/R injury (107, 322, 407, 532, 
610, 692, 710, 797, 873). More compelling support for this concept was provided by studies 
using pharmacological inhibitors that target T cell activation, migration, proliferation, and 
adhesion, while studies conducted in immunodeficient mice and in murine genetic knockout 
models lacking specific T cell types or T cell-derived effectors combined with adoptive 
immunotransfer of various T cell subsets illustrate the specific role for CD4+ T cells in I/R 
(458, 502, 512, 873, 886). In most organs tested, T cell/endothelial cell adhesive interactions 
are mediated by endothelial ICAM-1 (32, 85, 438, 859), VCAM-1 (438) and P-selectin (32, 
318, 859). On the other hand, transendothelial migration of these immunocytes is dependent 
on ICAM-1 (859), CD44 (861), and CD47 (742). It is important to note that this is not the 
case for stroke, where adhesion of T cells to cerebral microvasculature is not observed (886).
Two general subsets of CD4+ T lymphocytes, Th1 and Th2 cells have been described. Th1 
cells are proinflammatory, secreting IL-2, IL-12, IFNγ, and TNFα. On the other hand, Th2 
cells secrete primarily the anti-inflammatory cytokines IL-4, IL-5, IL-10, and IL-13. 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 42
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Consistent with these observations, recent studies using knockout mice have revealed a 
protective role for Th2 cells, while Th1 exert deleterious effects in I/R (711, 859, 889), 
suggesting that a balance between Th1 and Th2 activities influences the magnitude of 
postischemic tissue injury. Another subset of T helper lymphocytes, Th17 cells, appears to 
participate in organ rejection after I/R associated with transplantation and in lung I/R (139, 
321, 758). DCs induce naïve CD4+ T cells to differentiate into both Th1 and Th17 cells in an 
in vitro anoxia-reoxygenation model (873).
Occuring in a sterile environment, I/R is typified by the absence of foreign antigens 
(exceptions may be in cases of organ transplantation or epithelial barrier dysfunction 
induced by intestinal I/R). Thus, the mechanisms underlying CD4+ T cell activation and 
production of tissue injury after I/R are unclear. In light of these considerations, it is 
surprising that several studies have demonstrated antigen-dependent T cell activation in 
postischemic tissues (458, 516, 692). In contrast, several other studies provide evidence 
indicating that CD4+ T cells contribute to hepatic and renal I/R via antigen-independent 
mechanisms (322, 621, 713, 797, 873). This conundrum is likely explained by the danger 
model of immune regulation (543), described earlier. According to this model, danger or 
alarm antigenic signals liberated from dying cells are responsible for activating antigen 
presenting cells. High-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) has been shown to mediate hepatic 
I/R, suggesting that release of this nuclear protein involved in DNA binding and gene 
expression may be a candidate danger signal (794). In addition, antigen-independent 
activation of CD4+ T lymphocytes by Kuppfer cells has been noted after hepatic I/R, an 
effect attributed to postischemic ROS, TNFα, and IL-6 release (322).
Another mechanism whereby CD4+ T cells may promote postischemic tissue injury is via 
enhancing neutrophil infiltration into ischemic sites. Depletion or genetic deficiency of 
CD4+ T lymphocytes is associated with reductions in neutrophil sequestration and injury 
after I/R (107, 532, 610, 621, 709, 797, 873). This postischemic T cell-mediated neutrophil 
infiltration has been attributed to secretion of IL-17 by these lymphocytes (107, 709), 
although it seems likely that other T-cell-derived factors that are known to promote 
neutrophil sequestration, such as IL-1 and TNFα, may also participate. T cells contribute to 
postischemic renal injury by mechanisms dependent on IFNγ secretion and engagement of 
co-stimulatory molecules CD28 and B7 that does not require neutrophils (610). Still other 
studies implicate interactions between CD4+ lymphocytes with tissue-resident macrophages 
(i.e., Kupffer cells), an effect that may also involve platelets (417) and is mediated by CD40/
CD154 binding (710).
B cells and other lymphocytes (e.g., CD8+, Treg, and NK cells) also appear to participate in 
I/R. Indeed, several studies using B cell-deficient mice or inhibiting NK cells have 
demonstrated significant reductions in postischemic tissue injury (102, 134, 469, 476, 710, 
715, 845, 902, 904). The mechanisms underlying I/R injury by this lymphocyte subset have 
been explored using mice deficient in components of the complement system that interact 
with B cell receptors, with the results supporting the concept that I/R may involve B cell-
derived IgM and complement system activation (102, 476, 845, 902, 904).
Kalogeris et al.
Page 43
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
There is also some evidence for subsets of CD8+ T cells, T-regulatory cells, γδ T cells and 
natural killer cells in modulating the responses to I/R injury, especially in the setting of 
transplantation (41, 60, 125, 347, 348, 469, 512, 573, 610, 717), but some reports are 
contradictory (101–103, 458, 873). Treg cells accumulate 3–7 days into reperfusion and are 
involved in resolution and repair of tissue injury induced by I/R by a mechanism that 
involves IL-10 secretion (134, 260, 424, 425, 448).
Dendritic cells
DCs are the major antigen-presenting cells of the immune system and participate in I/R 
injury via their ability to activate T and B cells. As a consequence of I/R, DCs accumulate 
and are activated by TLR ligands such as interferon-γ, matrix components, and molecules 
liberated from necrotic cells (360a, 379a). In turn, DCs provide two signals to activate T 
cells, including antigen-specific signals arising from T cell receptor binding of peptides 
presented by MHC and a second signal provided by costimulatory molecules such CD40, 
CD80, and CD86. Of course, T cells can also be activated by antigen-independent pathways 
by cytokines, ROS and other pro-inflammatory molecules such as TNFα and CGRP that are 
formed during I/R, as outlined above. In the setting of transplantation-induced I/R, danger 
signals released from dying cells are recognized by PRRs of the innate immune system with 
subsequent activation of inflammatory cells, including DCs, which are directed to a more 
mature phenotype (379a, 639a). After lymph node homing, mature DCs present antigens to 
T cells causing their differentiation toward Th1 and Th17 effector cells, which can 
contribute to graft failure. There are also reports indicating that resident DCs confer 
protective responses to limit I/R injury and damage induced by allotransplantation (420a, 
639a). Although the non-stressed brain lacks DCs or functional counterparts that mediate 
antigen uptake and presentation, these cells do appear in brain parenchyma within 1 hr after 
induction of ischemia, where they act to exacerbate stroke-induced infarction (235a).
Platelets
Platelets normally circulate in an inactive state, owing to constitutive presence of inhibitory 
factors elaborated by quiescent endothelial cells (466a, 662, 664a). However, I/R-induced 
reductions in the bioavailability of NO, prostacyclin and other antiadhesive molecules, 
coupled with release of proinflammatory mediators such ROS, PAF, and other factors, 
results in platelet activation, which provokes not only their aggregation, but also platelet 
adherence to the endothelium and circulating and tissue-resident immunocytes. These 
interactions are mediated by platelet-expressed P-selectin and its ligands, PSGL-1 and 
GPIbα as well as several integrin receptors, notably αIIbβ3 (25, 155, 156, 465, 466a, 499, 
634, 662, 664a, 671, 676, 681).
Of the platelets adhering to the vascular wall during I/R, 75% are attached to leukocytes that 
are tethered to endothelial cells, with the remainder being bound directly by the endothelium 
(156, 416, 466a, 662, 664a). This raises the possibility for significant cross-talk amongst the 
three cell types to modulate adhesive-dependent inflammatory and thrombogenic events 
(466a, 662, 664a). Indeed, activated platelets release a number of proinflammatory and 
mitogenic molecules (e.g., IL-1β, RANTES, and soluble CD154), cytotoxic agents (e.g., 
hydrogen peroxide), proapoptotic molecules (calpain and TGFβ), and microvesicles (223, 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 44
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
262, 263, 416, 466a, 662, 664a). Some off these changes may account for the ability of 
platelets to participate in I/R-induced endothelial apoptosis (34, 623) and to cause NETosis 
(466a, 662, 664a). Clearly, platelet-induced promotion of leukocyte activation and adhesion 
is an important mechanism whereby thrombocytes contribute to postischemic tissue injury 
(416, 466a, 662, 664a, 676, 912).
Mast cells
Mast cells are tissue-resident inflammatory cells that are strategically localized close to 
blood vessels and neurons of most organs, being especially numerous in connective tissues 
and at mucosal surfaces of the airways and GI tract, allowing them to perform a sentinel 
function (170, 659, 749, 869). They contain numerous cytoplasmic granules that are filled 
with a large number of preformed proinflammatory mediators, including proteases, 
histamine, and serotonin, angiotensin II, and cytokines such as TNFα that are released on 
degranulation (170). Within minutes of activation, mast cells also synthesize and release 
arachidonate-derived lipid mediators (170). Mast cell degranulation and mediator release 
induces vascular fluid and protein leakage into the interstitium, resulting in the formation of 
edema, and promotes leukocyte homing to sites of inflammation (560a). Although it was 
long-held that mast cell degranulation resulted in indiscriminate release of all preformed 
mediators, it is now clear that certain constituent molecules can be expressed selectively, 
depending upon the nature of the stimulus and other prevailing tissue conditions (170, 206, 
257, 394, 472, 749, 777).
I/R promotes mast cell degranulation secondary to postischemic ROS production, 
complement activation, protease-dependent cleavage of extracellular matrix proteins and 
resulting exposure/release of matricryptic factors, and release of PAF, LTB4, CXC 
chemokines and calcitonin gene-related peptide (170, 395, 472, 659, 685, 869). If bacterial 
translocation occurs in response to severe gut ischemia, bacterial toxins also contribute to 
mast cell activation. Studies employing pharmacologic mast cell stabilizers, which act to 
prevent activation or degranulation, mast cell deficient animals, and knockout mouse models 
lacking mast cell surface receptors for specific mediators have provided compelling support 
for the role of mast cells in I/R (3, 69, 88, 254, 277, 394, 395, 472, 659, 668, 685, 747, 748, 
869). There is also evidence for ROI to the lung by local mast cells that are induced to 
degranulate by pathologic events initiate by distant site I/R (277).
Many reports have provided evidence that mast cell activation is associated with increased 
neutrophil infiltration into ischemic organs where these extravasated sentinels contribute to 
injury (65, 254, 256, 277, 395, 495, 685, 747, 748, 841, 907). Mast cells are an important 
source of angiotensin II, via expression of renin and chymase, which contributes to 
postischemic leukosequestration by a mechanism dependent on angiotensin II type I and 
type II receptor activation, NADPH oxidased-derived ROS, and the release of calcitonin 
gene-related peptide (895). However, there is a leukocyte-independent component of mast 
cell-degranulation-induced I/R (88, 472). A similar pattern occurs with regard to I/R-
induced, mast cell-dependent disruption of endothelial barrier function, with increases in 
vascular permeability exhibiting both leukocyte-dependent and independent mechanisms 
(495). As an additional contributory mechanism to ischemic stroke, mast cell release of 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 45
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
proteases such as tissue plasminogen activator as well as heparin, promotes thrombolysis, 
and hemorrhage (749).
The aforementioned work strongly supports use of mast cell inhibitors or stabilizers as an 
important therapy in ischemic disorders (88, 394, 411, 747–749). However, mast cell-
derived proteinase-activated receptor-2 (PAR-2) appears to modulate the deleterious effects 
of intestinal I/R (121), as does mast cell release of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 
(298) and proteases that target endothelin-1 for degradation (439, 544). The latter 
observations support the need for continued investigation of this expansive range of mast 
cell biology in I/R.
Monocytes, macrophages, and Kupffer cells
Kupffer cells are tissue-resident macrophages that are associated with hepatic sinusoidal 
epithelium, which places them in a strategic location to capture and clear bacteria and 
potentially injurious agents, such as endotoxin, arising from the bowel (71). Like mast cells, 
the participation of Kupffer cells in I/R is complicated by the fact that these phagocytic cells 
can function to either limit or promote inflammation, the net effect of which depends on 
ischemic duration and at what time point their functional role is assessed after reperfusion is 
instituted, which will be discussed below (204).
Proinflammatory actions—Kupffer cell activation occurs by two distinct, yet 
complementary mechanisms. TLR-dependent signaling mediates the first while the second 
occurs by complement activation. Hepatocyte injury after I/R liberates an inflammatory 
ligand for TLR-4 designated HMGB1, by ROS- and TLR-4-dependent mechanism (793, 
794). HMGB1 engagement of TLR-4 on Kupffer cells establishes a positive feedback for 
sustaining inflammatory responses after liver I/R that involves downstream expression of 
inflammatory cytokines occurring secondary to stimulation of NFκB-dependent 
transcription (71, 793, 794). The mechanism for complement activation involves the 
formation of C3a and C5a. Ligation of C3a and C5a receptors on Kupffer cells stimulates 
phospholipase C to produce diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol 3-phosphate (IP3). DAG 
stimulates protein kinase C (PKC)-dependent ROS production by NADPH oxidase (648a). 
ROS production is further reinforced by the effect of IP3 to stimulate Ca2+ mobilization 
from internal stores and uptake from the extracellular compartment. This IP3-dependent 
increase in Ca2+ also stimulates eicosanoid synthesis in Kupffer cells by the enzymatic 
activity of phospholiase A2-dependent cyclooxygenase (374).
Once activated by the aforementioned mechanisms in I/R, overexuberant production of 
oxidants, cytokines, PAF, and other proinflammatory mediators by Kupffer cells contribute 
to postischemic liver injury and remodeling (58, 108, 351, 374, 375, 378, 648a). MMP-9 
released from Kupffer cells, hepatic stellate cells and sinusoidal endothelial cells also 
contributes to the pathogenesis of hepatic I/R in the first 24 h of reperfusion but then switch 
roles at later times to facilitate liver recovery (235, 519). Gadolinium chloride (GdCl3), 
which causes Kupffer cell depletion in the liver and also produces a loss of macrophages in 
other organs, has been used to demonstrate the role for these inflammatory phagocytes in 
postischemic neutrophil sequestration and tissue injury (252, 267, 493, 513). These studies 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 46
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
indicated that Kupffer cells per se were not only directly responsible for early tissue damage 
after I/R, but also participated indirectly in later stages of injury which are primarily 
neutrophil dependent, since their recruitment occurred by Kupffer cell-dependent 
mechanisms (513). In addition to promoting neutrophil recruitment, Kupffer cells also 
activate CD4+ T-lymphocytes in liver I/R (322).
Anti-inflammatory actions—As noted earlier, Kupffer cells play dual roles in hepatic 
I/R, contributing to inflammation and cell injury early on during reperfusion, while exerting 
several actions that promote liver repair and healing at later stages. First, Kupffer cells 
induce apoptosis of PMNs and can also phagocytize these inflammatory cells, thereby acting 
as a brake to limit their injurious effects (96, 578, 713). Second, I/R often results in 
erythrocyte damage that results in increased plasma hemoglobin levels. As a consequence, 
heme-mediated oxidative injury occurs. Kuppfer cells function to limit this oxidative stress 
by clearing free hemoglobin from the plasma via the CD163 scavenger receptor, which is 
then followed by heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1)-dependent heme degradation (54, 55, 190, 211, 
264, 274, 432, 452, 677, 751, 787). Indeed, the success of hepatic transplantion correlates 
with donor liver HO-1 expression before surgery (264). It is of interest to further note that 
Kupffer cells expressing high levels of HO-1 liberate proinflammatory cytokines at lower 
rates while their release of anti-inflammatory mediators is increased (211, 431).
Monocytes/macrophages also play pro- and anti-inflammatory roles in postischemic heart, 
demonstrating phenotypic plasticity that allow them to exacerbate injury and to participate in 
regenerative processes (206a, 249, 250, 717a). In the early stages of reperfusion, necrosis 
activates macrophages to extend ischemic injury in a fashion similar to Kupffer cell 
activation in the liver. In later stages, these inflammatory cells function to remove debris and 
clear injured myocardium of dead cells and facilitate healing. Microglia are the brain’s 
resident macrophages and like cardiac macrophages and hepatic Kupffer cells exhibit a 
biphasic polarization during reperfusion, first contributing to tissue injury and then 
facilitating repair (524a). Similar divergent roles for macrophages have been reported in 
organ transplantation (679a).
Plasma Membrane-Derived Microparticles
Following activation by I/R, apoptotic signaling, thrombin, or TNF, a number of cell types 
including platelets, erythrocytes, leukocytes, and endothelial cells, release small (0.1–1 µm 
diameter) membrane vesicles called microparticles (27, 353, 487, 545, 652). Although 
originally dismissed as cellular debris, it is now clear that microparticles display strong 
procoagulant activity and encapsulate a number of molecular entities that contribute to the 
pathogenesis of I/R by shuttling signaling agents amongst cell types (27, 353, 487, 545, 652, 
772). These include bioactive lipids, chemokines, cytokines, tissue factor, arachidonic acid, 
integrins, receptors, RNA, proteases, growth factors, and caspases. Microparticle derived 
PAF may be of particular importance in I/R since this powerful mediator activates platelets 
to promote their aggregation, adhesion to endothelial cells and leukocytes, and leukocyte 
sequestration in postischemic tissues. Calpain, a protease implicated in I/R, is also carried on 
these vesicular structures, which protects the enzyme from plasma inhibitors (413, 584).
Kalogeris et al.
Page 47
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Because microparticles derived from membranes of activated endothelium, platelets, 
lymphocytes and leukocytes are liberated into the blood flow reperfusing ischemic sites, 
they can travel via the circulation to distant organs to cause ROI secondary to distant 
thrombogenic and proinflammatory effects (140, 265). Moreover, I/R-induced microparticle 
release from endothelial cells, platelets, NK cells, and CD8+ T cells activate JNK and NFκB 
and increase the expression of endothelial cell adhesion molecules (772). Exciting recent 
work indicates that adherent platelets form extremely long (up to 250 µm), negatively 
charged protrusions (FLIPRs) under conditions of flow. As neutrophils roll over FLIPRs, 
they retrieve fragments of these platelet membrane strands as microparticles on their surface, 
which in turn activate these phagocytic cells (775). While the role of this neutrophil 
activating mechanism has not been evaluated in I/R, it is tempting to speculate that this 
could be very important given the strong association among neutrophils, platelets, and the 
endothelium in postischemic tissues.
Protein Cleavage Products and other Degradation Products in I/R
The pathologic processes induced by I/R results in damage to and degradation of 
intracellular proteins. This is accompanied by impaired function of the ubiquitin-proteasome 
system (UPS), the tightly-regulated catalytic machinery that normally functions to degrade 
damaged/dysfunctional intracellular proteins. The end result of both processes is disrupted 
signaling and accumulation of toxic protein aggregates in postischemic tissues (106, 166, 
306). Ischemic preconditioning preserves postischemic UPS function by a mechanism that 
preserves signaling molecules, such PKCε and PKCδ. Although the latter observation 
supports the view that therapeutic approaches targeted at preserving UPS function may 
enhance cell viability in I/R, reports of the efficacy of proteasome inhibition as a treatment 
for myocardial ischemia have yielded discordant results, with some studies describing 
reductions in infarct size, while others show deleterious effects on cardiac function (893). 
Since the cardiac UPS is comprised of distinct subpopulations which differ in subunit 
composition, associating partners, and posttranslational modifications, differential activation 
of protective versus antiprotective UPS subpopulations may account for the incongruous 
data (106, 166, 201, 892).
Two important protease systems that are now recognized to contribute to I/R injury are the 
calpain-calpastatin system and MMPs (336, 649). Pharmacological calpain or MMP 
inhibition reduced I/R injury in the myocardium, kidneys, and brain (119, 128, 339, 415, 
523, 872). The DNA repair enzyme poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) is a 
preferred substrate of several so-called “suicide” proteases, which include the calpains and 
MMPs (124). The activity of these proteases on PARP-1 produces cleavage fragments that 
serve as signature biomarkers for specific patterns of protease activity in cell death 
programs.
While calpain knockout mice are not commercially available, use of knockout models 
targeting specific MMP isoforms has established roles for MMP-2 and MMP-9 as important 
contributors to I/R injury. I/R-induced formation of H2O2 and ONOO- activates these MMPs 
and their enzymatic activity results in endothelial and contractile dysfunction in the heart in 
the absence of discernable cell death (649). In addition to intracellular MMPs, activation of 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 48
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
MMPs in the extracellular space (e.g., following their release from tissue-resident immune 
cells) target the extracellular matrix proteins (ECMs) to expose matricryptic sites or release 
matricryptins that are normally hidden within the three-dimensional conformational 
structure of the ECM proteins. As a consequence, cleavage products derived from the ECM 
can produce cytotoxic effects in I/R (339). Some small peptide fragments that are released 
from the ECM after MMP-mediated proteolytic cleavage function as “matrikines,” 
interacting with specific cell receptors to alter cell function, including induction of 
neutrophil chemotaxis (840), which could potentially contribute to postischemic 
leukosequestration. In addition to protein degradation that contributes to postischemic injury 
at early stages, MMP expression is transcriptionally upregulated during later myocardial 
remodeling and repair. The importance of MMPs in the production of both injury and in 
repair complicates the potential use of MMP inhibitors in the treatment of I/R.
Membrane lipid degradation and fatty acid oxidation pathways are also altered by I/R and 
contribute to postischemic tissue injury. Pharmacologic inhibition of fatty acid oxidation 
exerts infarct-sparing effects and improves cardiac function after I/R (707). The mechanism 
underlying this protective effect is not yet clear but may be due to the resulting shift from 
fatty acid oxidation to glucose utilization for ATP production under ischemic conditions as 
well as to prevention of fatty acid metabolite accumulation. On the other hand, I/R results in 
increased phospholipase activation, which liberates arachidonic acid from cell membranes. 
Thus, it is not surprising that phospholipase A2 inhibition is protective in stroke models, 
limiting infarct size and improving neurologic outcomes (345). Since ROS production is also 
a consequence of lipid degradation, it is likely that lipooxidative mediators contribute to 
secondary injury in the brain after stroke (491, 636).
I/R Induces Capillary No-Reflow, a Nutritive Perfusion Impairment
I/R is associated with the development of the no-reflow phenomenon, a failure of nutritive 
perfusion characterized by a decrease in the number of perfused capillaries (309, 310, 697). 
This postischemic impairment in capillary reflow was first described in the brain by Ames 
and co-workers (19) and was subsequently shown to occur in postischemic skeletal muscle, 
heart, kidney, and small intestine (384–387, 396, 428, 697, 750, 752). While it was once 
thought that microvascular thrombus formation was an important contributing mechanism 
underlying this nutritive perfusion impairment, microvessel thrombosis is rarely observed in 
intravital microscopic studies or after light and electron microscopic examination of 
reperfused tissues (309, 310). Moreover, postischemic capillary no-reflow is not improved 
by heparin treatment. An exception to this conclusion is distal embolization induced by 
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), causing capillary no-reflow following myocardial 
ischemia which can also occur in regions not exposed to ischemia before this procedure. 
This nutritive perfusion impairment occurs in 5% to 50% of patients undergoing PCI and is 
an independent predictor of adverse outcome (585).
Rather than obstruction by platelet or fibrin thrombi, it appears that leukocyte-capillary 
plugging contributes to the no-reflow-induced microvascular perfusion impairment 
associated with I/R (218, 309, 310, 750) (Fig. 11). Indeed, studies conducted in the heart 
noted the presence of leukocytes in a very high proportion of capillaries exhibiting no-reflow 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 49
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
after reperfusion. Physical impaction of leukocytes in capillary lumens occurs because 
neutrophils are large (8 µm diameter), stiff cells that become even less deformable when 
exposed to the acidic environment that exists in ischemic tissues, making it more difficult to 
traverse the smaller diameter (4 µm) capillaries. In the face of this increased stiffness and 
because blood pressure driving flow through capillaries is reduced during ischemia, these 
large cells are more likely to become entrapped in capillaries, thereby blocking perfusion. 
Capillary plugging by neutrophils is further compounded by I/R-induced disruption of 
endothelial cell volume regulatory mechanisms, which causes endothelial cells to swell, 
thereby narrowing the capillary lumen (396, 546) (Fig. 11). Treatment with hypertonic, 
hyperosmotic saline/dextran solutions limits endothelial cell swelling and reduces capillary 
no-reflow (385, 546, 555).
I/R-induced, neutrophil-dependent increases in microvascular permeability also contribute to 
postischemic no-reflow in some tissues, such as skeletal muscle (309, 310, 386) (Fig. 11). 
The postischemic disruption of endothelial barrier function results in fluid and protein efflux 
across exchange microvessels. The accumulation of edema fluid in ischemic tissues coupled 
with parenchymal cell swelling increases tissue pressure. The resulting decrease in 
transmural pressure causes capillaries and postcapillary venules to collapse, preventing 
blood flow through their narrowed lumens. This edemagenic mechanism to explain 
postischemic nutritive perfusion impairments is most relevant to organs that cannot readily 
expand when fluid accumulates in the interstitial spaces because they are encased by 
nonelastic structures. For example, the cranial vault, fascial sheathes, and renal capsule 
surround the brain, many skeletal muscles, and kidneys, respectively, to limit their expansion 
as edema forms. The movement of fluid from the plasma to the interstitial space (interstitial 
edema) and into parenchymal cells (cell edema) induced by ischemia results in increased 
microvessel hematocrit and blood viscosity, which may act to further impair capillary 
perfusion in postischemic tissues by raising the resistance to blood flow. Degradation of the 
coronary vasculature after I/R contributes to disrupted capillary integrity, leading to 
hemorrhagic infarctions (termed vascular rhexis) that also contribute to the no-reflow 
phenomenon (898).
Neutrophil depletion virtually abolishes this perfusion impairment in reperfused tissues, as 
does pretreatment with function blocking antibodies directed against CD11/CD18 on 
leukocytes and ICAM-1 or P-selectin on the endothelium (385–387). ROS are also involved 
since antioxidant therapy prevents postischemic leukocyte/endothelial cell adhesion and 
restores capillary perfusion (556, 557). Very recent work has implicated neutrophil 
extracellular traps (NETs), web-like constructs of decondensed chromatin and anti-microbial 
proteins released by these phagocytic cells in response to platelet and/or endothelial 
activation, in myocardial no-reflow (263) (Fig. 11). These NETs facilitate activation of the 
coagulation cascade and platelets, as well as by actions to promote cleavage of tissue factor 
pathway inhibitor, thereby limiting endogenous anticoagulation (263, 285). Neutrophilic 
NETosis may be facilitated by platelets adhering to their surface (466a, 662, 664a).
Pericytes surround almost all capillaries, extending processes along and around the vessel to 
cover greater than 95% of their abluminal surface in some organs. These perivascular cells 
also surround small arterioles and venules, but their density is reduced in these vessels. 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 50
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Since pericytes are contractile and responsive to mediators implicated in I/R, it has been 
suggested that they may modulate postischemic nutritive perfusion (238, 321, 598) (Fig. 11). 
Moreover, because CNS capillaries are more richly invested with pericytes than in other 
areas of the body, they may be particularly important in stroke. Indeed, pericyte contracture 
reduces capillary lumenal diameter in retinal or cerebral ischemia. Even after reperfusion, 
these pericapillary cells remain contracted by an endothelium-dependent, peroxynitrite-
mediated mechanism (317, 631, 882). Stroke-induced pericyte contracture was followed by 
pericyte death in rigor, which produced irreversible nutritive perfusion impairment (317).
Assessment of the principal mechanisms contributing to the microvascular perfusion 
impairment in each patient is now being explored to tailor the selection of treatment 
strategies (anti-platelet therapy vs vasodilators vs embolic protection devices versus and 
pharmacologic pre- and postconditioning strategies) to limit reperfusion injury (586, 587, 
625, 697).
Genomic/Proteomic/Metabolomic Insights
Genome-wide association studies have been used to examine myocardial gene expression 
signatures, identifying approximately 152 genomic loci and over 300 genes that may 
contribute to enhanced risk for coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction (52, 74, 75, 
112, 597, 765, 855). This genomic analysis has also uncovered chromosomal locations 
associated with ischemic stroke and peripheral artery disease, with some loci in common to 
those associated with coronary disease and heart attack. The latter observation suggests that 
these organs share overlapping genetic contributions to ischemic disease risk. An interesting 
outcome of this genomic analysis has been identification of chromosomal regions that lack 
genes that had been linked to ischemic disease risk and infarction in previous work. This 
formulates the basis for uncovering novel mechanisms by which genes in these previously 
underappreciated loci contribute to ischemic disease. Genomic studies are also being 
pursued for precision medicine, based on the enormous potential for uncovering specific 
chromosomal variations that may account for differential patient responses to cardiovascular 
(and other) drugs, thereby allowing design of personalized therapeutic regimens related to 
specific genotypes.
Similarly, data obtained from application of metabolomic, proteomic, and lipidomic 
profiling approaches have provided a wealth of data that have great potential to identify 
novel biological indicators and new pathologic pathways that contribute to cardiovascular 
disease risk and infarction (30, 80, 143, 266, 501, 779). This requires the development of 
innovative technological platforms and computational models to allow use of shared high-
powered computational resources for systematic data mining, processing, and integration to 
identify complex data patterns and infer relations amongst protein, lipid and metabolite 
expression in individual patients to their cardiovascular disease phenotype. Even small 
scaleomics studies have led to remarkable insights. As an example, Wang and co-workers 
(829) used metabolomic approaches to identify phospholipid-associated molecules that 
contribute to plaque formation in arteries that depends on dietary phosphotidylcholine 
intake, metabolism of this phospholipid to trimethylamine (TMA) by commensal bacteria in 
the gastrointestinal tract (Fig. 12). Following intestinal absorption, TMA is transported to 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 51
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
the liver where the enzymatic activity of flavin monooxygenases metabolizes this precursor 
to trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO). TMAO facilitates the buildup of arterial plaque by 
promoting a proatherogenic transformation in macrophage phenotype (829). Based on 
subsequent work, it was suggested that TMAO may increase macrophage scavenger 
receptors while reducing reverse cholesterol transport, thereby promoting foam cell 
formation and development of atherosclerosis (434). This was followed by the 
demonstration that TMAO promotes the activation and recruitment of leukocytes to aortic 
endothelial cells concident with activation of MAPK, ERK, and NFkB signaling cascades 
and expression of inflammatory genes (702).
More directly relevant to I/R, recent work by Zhu et al. (921) uncovered a strong association 
between plasma TMAO levels and thrombotic events (Fig. 12). They further demonstrated 
that TMAO promoted platelet aggregation in response to various agonists, enhanced platelet 
adhesion to collagen, and decreased time to occlusive thrombosis in a carotid injury model. 
Similar results were obtained in platelets obtained from animals fed TMAO or choline. 
These effects were absent in mice treated with antibiotics and in germ-free animals. Because 
washed platelets obtained from TMAO-treated animals were not hyperresponsive, Zhu et al. 
(921) suggested that plasma TMAO directly activated platelets to produce a 
prothrombogenic phenotype. Support for the latter contention was provided by the 
observation that TMAO exposure caused platelet IP3 levels to increase and trigger Ca2+ 
release (Fig. 12).
It is of interest to note that the effects of the gut microbiota on hepatic TMAO production 
and potential for atherogenic lesion and thrombosis formation were transmissible, inasmuch 
as fecal transplants from animals with high TMAO levels to germ-free mice produced a 
proatherogenic and prothrombogenic phenotype (297, 921). This same group has also shown 
that treatment with a structural analog of choline nonlethally inhibited TMA production 
from polymicrobial cultures and reduced TMAO levels, macrophage foam cell formation, 
and atherosclerotic lesion development in atheroprone mice fed high choline or L-carnitine 
diets (830). Thus, it appears that new therapies targeting gut commensal bacterial production 
of TMA may reduce the risk for thrombosis. Other avenues include dietary restriction of 
foods rich in TMA precursors, gut microbiome manipulation by pre- and probiotics, use of 
drugs that target the hepatic conversion of TMA to TMAO, and blocking the ability of 
TMAO to elicit its biologic effects via development of agents that that bind and assist in 
eliminating TMA or TMAO or antagonists that target as yet unidentified TMAO receptors 
(95). With regard to the notion that reductions in TMAO levels by restricting intake of TMA 
precursers or TMAO may attenuate the likelihood of adverse cardiovascular events, it is 
curious to note that seafood constuents of the cardioprotective Mediterranean diet are rich in 
TMAOs (799). This suggests that a much greater understanding of TMAO metabolism is 
required to advance therapeutic approaches related to the gut microbiome as a driver of 
cardiometabolic vascular disease.
Concluding Remarks and Perspectives
Age-adjusted cardiovascular mortality has declined dramatically over the past several 
decades. This has been accompanied by major improvements in discharge disposition, 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 52
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
decreases in the likelihood of readmission, and an impressive reduction in hospitalization 
rates for patients with or at risk for cardiovascular disease and stroke. Advances in 
pharmaceuticals (e.g., thrombolytic agents, antiplatelet drugs, beta blockers, and angiotensin 
converting enzyme inhibitors and receptor blockers), aggressive management of risk factors 
for cardiovascular disease, development of approaches to restore tissue perfusion (e.g., PCI 
and cardiopulmonary bypass), improved patient education and awareness, enhancements in 
quality of care (via more rapid risk stratification, timeliness of treatment, and hospital 
process performance analysis to ensure appropriate application of proven interventions), the 
discovery of sensitive blood indicators, and development of sophisticated imaging 
methodologies to detect subclinical disease years before symptomatic presentation all have 
contributed to this success. During this same period, intensive research has uncovered 
several major concepts regarding the mechanisms of I/R including: (i) the discovery that 
short bouts of I/R activate cell survival programs (ischemic conditioning) that limit lethal I/R 
injury (and indicating that there is a bimodal or hormetic response to I/R), (ii) reperfusion 
paradoxically amplifies cell injury and death, which occurs by mechanisms that are distinct 
from those induced by ischemia per se, (iii) uncovering of multiple death modalities that 
contribute to I/R-induced cell death, many of which occur by programmed sequences of 
events, (iv) fetal exposure to stressors incur programming events that enhance the 
susceptibility to cardiovascular disease and I/R syndromes later in life, and (v) numerous, 
complex, and highly interactive mechanisms underlie the pathogenesis of I/R. These include, 
but are not limited to, disruption in ion transport mechanisms that result in cellular calcium 
overload, overexuberant production of ROS and RNOS, inflammation, protein kinase 
activation, development of ER and mitochondrial dysfunction, epigenetic alterations in gene 
expression, formation of protein cleavage products, development of no-reflow, roles for the 
gut microbiome, and genomic/metabolomic/lipidomic contributions to clinical phenotypes.
Despite this enhanced mechanistic understanding of I/R injury from preclinical studies, there 
has been very little success in transforming these discoveries into new adjuvant therapies 
with proven efficacy in relevant patient populations (89, 109, 399, 427, 474, 565, 597, 614, 
645, 809). Indeed, no new treatment to reduce infarct size has emerged since the advent of 
thrombolysis and angioplasty. This disappointing translation of mechanistic findings relates 
in part to the limitations imposed by conducting evaluative trials in patients with advanced 
disease that may be beyond salvage, which also imposes a short time window for improving 
outcomes. Perhaps more importantly, much of the preclinical work conducted to date has 
been accomplished in young, healthy animals, whereas patients usually present with 
coexisting risk factors. Another factor, which is only now emerging as a consideration, is 
contributions from the host’s microbiome. Because the microbiome is influenced by a host 
of factors that are rarely controlled for, microbiota composition differences may contribute 
in a major way to discrepant findings in the literature. A fourth explanation relates to 
therapeutic focus on a single contributory mechanism in the setting of multi-factorial 
pathological processes that sum to produce tissue injury and death. Indeed, the large number 
of contributory factors in the pathogenesis of I/R injury argues against the concept of single 
drug intervention that has characterized the approaches adopted in basic research, by the 
pharmaceutical industry, and in clinical trials. On the other hand, studies investigating the 
mechanisms underlying the protective actions of ischemic preconditioning have shown that 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 53
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
this intervention targets multiple pathologic processes in I/R, raising the hope that 
pharmacologic agents that mimic its powerful cardioprotective effects might prove more 
effective. In addition, since conditioning activates cell signaling programs to upregulate the 
expression of several survival proteins, gene therapy approaches based on these discoveries 
have also shown promise. However, while success of initial small scale trials indicated that 
such conditioning-based approaches might improve clinical outcomes (16, 126, 823, 834), 
larger trials have failed to confirm efficacy (399, 614, 645, 796, 881). This led to proposals 
to better standardize protocols for therapeutic intervention by conditioning approaches, more 
extensive and rigorous experimental validation of new targets in preclinical work before 
patient testing is considered, and to design clinical trials with an eye toward decreasing 
patient heterogeneity with regard to cardiovascular disease phenotype (399, 881). Until only 
the last decade or so, I/R studies in general and work focused on conditioning mechanisms 
was conducted largely in young, healthy animals. This experimental focus, when coupled 
with the growing body of evidence indicating that the cardioprotective effects of 
conditioning strategies are subverted by the presence of comorbid risk factors, indicates that 
the design of preclinical studies should include models that better mirror patient phenotype 
in those suffering adverse cardiovascular events. Another point of this discussion is to 
recognize that ischemic disorders have complex, multifactorial etiologies that are 
pathophysiologically heterogeneous but highly interactive. As such, prevailing paradigms 
have to be constantly evaluated, updated, and adjusted by new evidence, with care taken not 
to become entrenched or biased by current dogma.
The application of stem cell therapy holds great promise because it targets repair and 
regenerative processes in postischemic tissues, thereby avoiding the issues described above 
that have contributed to the failure of treatments directed at mechanisms directly causing 
injury in I/R. Indeed, injection of adult stem cells into hearts and brains damaged by I/R was 
shown to improve function and facilitate beneficial remodeling (78, 607, 786, 906). While it 
was presumed that these effects were due to differentiation of the engrafted stem cells into 
cardiac myocytes and vascular cells, other studies failed to demonstrate such plasticity (42, 
577). In addition, adult stem cells show poor survivability after injection into the harsh 
milieu present in postischemic tissues (270). Moreover, sufficient numbers of cardiac 
myocytes cannot be generated from the relatively small numbers of stem cells that are 
injected (346). Based on this information, it was recently suggested that adult stem cells 
improve function and promote reparative remodelling via their release of paracrine 
mediators such as growth factors and chemokines (346). The beneficial actions of such 
paracrine factors appear to be related to release of cytoprotective molecules, 
immunomodulatory effects, promotion of cardiomyocyte proliferation, alterations in ECM 
remodeling that limit fibrosis, stimulation of angiogenesis, activation of tissue resident stem 
cells to differentiate into cardiac myocytes, and may involve release of exosomes and 
microvesicles (346). Because of the complex multifactorial processes that participate in 
postischemic healing, it is clear that these paracrine mechanisms are highly dynamic and 
require exquisite temporal and spatial organization to effect repair and regeneration. 
Understanding these multifaceted, dynamically phased, and highly pleiotropic mechanisms 
will be a major focus of future research to improve stem cell-mediated tissue repair and 
regeneration after I/R.
Kalogeris et al.
Page 54
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Acknowledgments
The authors’ work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (HL-092327, HL-094404, 
HL-116525, AA-022108, GM-115553, and HL-095486).
References
1. Abdellatif M. Differential expression of microRNAs in different disease states. Circ Res. 2012; 
110:638–650. [PubMed: 22343558] 
2. Abela CB, Homer-Vanniasinkham S. Clinical implications of ischaemia-reperfusion injury. 
Pathophysiology. 2003; 9:229–240. [PubMed: 14567926] 
3. Abonia JP, Friend DS, Austen WG Jr, Moore FD Jr, Carroll MC, Chan R, Afnan J, Humbles A, 
Gerard C, Knight P, Kanaoka Y, Yasuda S, Morokawa N, Austen KF, Stevens RL, Gurish MF. Mast 
cell protease 5 mediates ischemia-reperfusion injury of mouse skeletal muscle. J Immunol. 2005; 
174:7285–7291. [PubMed: 15905575] 
4. Abramov AY, Scorziello A, Duchon M. Three distinct mechanisms generate oxygen free radicals in 
neurons and contribute to cell death during anoxia and reoxygenation. J Neurosci. 2007; 27:1129–
1138. [PubMed: 17267568] 
5. Adibhatha RM, Hatche JF. Lipid oxidation and peroxidation in CNS health and disease: From 
molecular mechanisms to therapeutic opportunities. Antiox Redox Signal. 2010; 12:125–169.
6. Aguilar-Nascimento JE, Salomao AB, Nochi RJ Jr, Nascimento M, Neves S. Intraluminal injection 
of short chain fatty acids diminishes intestinal mucosa injury in experimental ischemia-reperfusion. 
Acta Cir Bras. 2006; 21:21–25. [PubMed: 16491218] 
7. Ahern PP, Izcue A, Maloy KJ, Powrie F. The interleukin-23 axis in intestinal inflammation. 
Immunol Rev. 2008; 226:147–159. [PubMed: 19161422] 
8. Ahluwalia A, De Felipe C, O’Brien J, Hunt SP, Perretti M. Impaired IL-1beta-induced neutrophil 
accumulation in tachykinin NK1 receptor knockout mice. Br J Pharmacol. 1998; 124:1013–1015. 
[PubMed: 9720767] 
9. Aikawa R, Komuro I, Yamazaki T, Zou Y, Kudoh S, Tanaka M, Shiojima I, Hiroi Y, Yazaki Y. 
Oxidative stress activates extracellualar signal-regulated kinases through Src and Ras in cultured 
cardiac myocytes of neonatal rats. J Clin Invest. 1997; 100:1813–1821. [PubMed: 9312182] 
10. Aiken CE, Ozanne SE. Transgenerational developmental programming. Hum Reprod Update. 
2014; 20:63–75. [PubMed: 24082037] 
11. Aikens J, Dix TA. Perhydroxyl radical (HOO.) initiated lipid peroxidation. The role of fatty acid 
hydroperoxides. J Biol Chem. 1991; 266:15091–15098. [PubMed: 1869544] 
12. Akhmedov A, Montecucco F, Braunersreuther V, Camici GG, Jakob P, Reiner MF, Glanzmann M, 
Burger F, Paneni F, Galan K, Pelli G, Vuilleumier N, Belin A, Vallee JP, Mach F, Luscher TF. 
Genetic deletion of the adaptor protein p66Shc increases susceptibility to short-term ischaemic 
myocardial injury via intracellular salvage pathways. Eur Heart J. 2015; 36:516–526. [PubMed: 
25336219] 
13. Alam MR, Baetz D, Ovize M. Cyclophilin D and myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury: A fresh 
perspective. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2015; 78:80–89. [PubMed: 25281838] 
14. Alexander BT, Dasinger JH, Intapad S. Fetal programming and cardiovascular pathology. Compr 
Physiol. 2015; 5:997–1025. [PubMed: 25880521] 
15. Alexander JS, Elrod JW. Extracellular matrix, junctional integrity and matrix metalloproteinase 
interactions in endothelial permeability regulation. J Anat. 2002; 200:561–574. [PubMed: 
12162724] 
16. Ali ZA, Callaghan CJ, Lim E, Ali AA, Nouraei SA, Akthar AM, Boyle JR, Varty K, Kharbanda 
RK, Dutka DP, Gaunt ME. Remote ischemic preconditioning reduces myocardial and renal injury 
after elective abdominal aortic aneurysm repair: A randomized controlled trial. Circulation. 2007; 
116:I98–105. [PubMed: 17846333] 
17. Allen CL, Bayraktutan U. Oxidative stress and its role in the pathogenesis of ischaemic stroke. Int 
J Stroke. 2009; 4:461–470. [PubMed: 19930058] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 55
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
18. Alverdy JC, Chang EB. The re-emerging role of the intestinal microflora in critical illness and 
inflammation: Why the gut hypothesis of sepsis syndrome will not go away. J Leukoc Biol. 2008; 
83:461–466. [PubMed: 18160538] 
19. Ames A III, Wright RL, Kowada M, Thurston JM, Majno G. Cerebral ischemia. II. The no-reflow 
phenomenon. Am J Pathol. 1968; 52:437–453. [PubMed: 5635861] 
20. Anand SS, Islam S, Rosengren A, Franzosi MG, Steyn K, Yusufali AH, Keltai M, Diaz R, 
Rangarajan S, Yusuf S. Risk factors for myocardial infarction in women and men: Insights from 
the INTERHEART study. Eur Heart J. 2008; 29:932–940. [PubMed: 18334475] 
21. Anderson CM, Lopez F, Zimmer A, Benoit JN. Placental insufficiency leads to developmental 
hypertension and mesenteric artery dysfunction in two generations of Sprague-Dawley rat 
offspring. Biol Reprod. 2006; 74:538–544. [PubMed: 16306423] 
22. Andrabi SA, Dawson TM, Dawson VL. Mitochondrial and nuclear cross talk in cell death: 
Parthanatos. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2008; 1147:233–241. [PubMed: 19076445] 
23. Andrade-Oliveira V, Amano MT, Correa-Costa M, Castoldi A, Felizardo RJ, de Almeida DC, Bassi 
EJ, Moraes-Vieira PM, Hiyane MI, Rodas AC, Peron JP, Aguiar CF, Reis MA, Ribeiro WR, 
Valduga CJ, Curi R, Vinolo MA, Ferreira CM, Camara NO. Gut bacteria products prevent AKI 
induced by ischemia-reperfusion. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015; 26:1877–1888. [PubMed: 25589612] 
24. Andres AM, Hernandez G, Lee P, Huang C, Ratliff EP, Sin J, Thornton CA, Damasco MV, Gottlieb 
RA. Mitophagy is required for acute cardioprotection by simvastatin. Antioxid Redox Signal. 
2014; 21:1960–1973. [PubMed: 23901824] 
25. Andrews RK, Berndt MC. Platelet physiology and thrombosis. Thromb Res. 2004; 114:447–453. 
[PubMed: 15507277] 
26. Anea CB, Zhang M, Chen F, Ali MI, Hart CM, Stepp DW, Kovalenkov YO, Merloiu AM, Pati P, 
Fulton D, Rudic RD. Circadian clock control of Nox4 and reactive oxygen species in the 
vasculature. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e78626. [PubMed: 24205282] 
27. Angelillo-Scherrer A. Leukocyte-derived microparticles in vascular homeostasis. Circ Res. 2011; 
110:356–369.
28. Antonopoulos A, Kyriacou C, Kazianis G. Significance of endothelin-1 in myocardial infarction. 
Hellenic J Cardiol. 2007; 48:161–164. [PubMed: 17629179] 
29. Arany I, Faisa A, Clark JS, Vera T, Baliga R, Nagamine Y. p66Shc-mediated mitochondrial 
dysfunction in renal proximal tubule cells during oxidative injury. Am J Physiol. 2010; 
298:F1214–F1221.
30. Arrell DK, Elliott ST, Kane LA, Guo Y, Ko YH, Pedersen PL, Robinson J, Murata M, Murphy 
AM, Marban E, Van Eyk JE. Proteomic analysis of pharmacological preconditioning: Novel 
protein targets converge to mitochondrial metabolism pathways. Circ Res. 2006; 99:706–714. 
[PubMed: 16946135] 
31. Aspelund A, Robciuc MR, Karaman S, Makinen T, Alitalo K. Lymphatic system in cardiovascular 
medicine. Circ Res. 2016; 118:515–530. [PubMed: 26846644] 
32. Atarashi K, Hirata T, Matsumoto M, Kanemitsu N, Miyasaka M. Rolling of Th1 cells via P-
selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 stimulates LFA-1-mediated cell binding to ICAM-1. J Immunol. 
2005; 174:1424–1432. [PubMed: 15661900] 
33. Aune SE, Herr DJ, Kutz CJ, Menick DR. Histone deacetylases exert class-specific roles in 
conditioning the brain and heart against acute ischemic injury. Front Neurol. 2015; 6:145. 
[PubMed: 26175715] 
34. Azad N, Iyer A, Vallyathan V, Wang L, Castranova V, Stehlik C, Rojanaskul Y. Role of oxidative/
nitrosative stress-mediated Bcl-2 regulation in apoptosis and malignant transformation. Ann NY 
Acad Sci. 2010; 1203:1–6. [PubMed: 20716276] 
35. Baines CP. The mitochondrial permeability transition pore and ischemia-reperfusion injury. Basic 
Res Cardiol. 2009; 104:181–188. [PubMed: 19242640] 
36. Baines CP. The molecular composition of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore. J Mol 
Cell Cardiol. 2009; 46:850–857. [PubMed: 19233198] 
37. Baines CP. The cardiac mitochondrion: Nexus of stress. Annu Rev Physiol. 2010; 72:61–80. 
[PubMed: 20148667] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 56
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
38. Baines CP. How and when do myocytes die during ischemia and reperfusion: The late phase. J 
Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther. 2011; 16:239–243. [PubMed: 21821522] 
39. Baines CP, Kaiser RA, Purcell NH, Blair NS, Osinska H, Hambleton MA, Brunskill EW, Sayen 
MR, Gottlieb RA, Dorn GW, Robbins J, Molkentin JD. Loss of cyclophilin D reveals a critical role 
for mitochondrial permeability transition in cell death. Nature. 2005; 434:658–662. [PubMed: 
15800627] 
40. Baines CP, Zhang J, Wang GW, Zheng YT, Xiu JX, Cardwell EM, Bolli R, Ping P. Mitochondrial 
PKCe and MAPK form signaling modules in the murine heart: Enhanced mitochondrial PKCe-
MAPK interactions and differential MAPK activation in PKCe-induced cardioprotection. Circ Res. 
2002; 90:390–7. [PubMed: 11884367] 
41. Baldwin WM III, Su CA, Shroka TM, Fairchild RL. Experimental models of cardiac 
transplantation: Design determines relevance. Curr Opin Organ Transplant. 2014; 19:525–530. 
[PubMed: 25160697] 
42. Balsam LB, Wagers AJ, Christensen JL, Kofidis T, Weissman IL, Robbins RC. Haematopoietic 
stem cells adopt mature haematopoietic fates in ischaemic myocardium. Nature. 2004; 428:668–
673. [PubMed: 15034594] 
43. Bang C, Fiedler J, Thum T. Cardiovascular importance of the microRNA-23/27/24 family. 
Microcirculation. 2012; 19:208–214. [PubMed: 22136461] 
44. Barchowsky A, Munro SR, Morana SJ, Vincenti MP, Treadwell M. Oxidant-sensitive and 
phosphorylation-dependent activation of NF-kappa B and AP-1 in endothelial cells. Am J Physiol. 
269:L829–836.
45. Barker DJ. Fetal origins of coronary heart disease. BMJ. 1995; 311:171–174. [PubMed: 7613432] 
46. Barker DJ, Osmond C. Infant mortality, childhood nutrition, and ischaemic heart disease in 
England and Wales. Lancet. 1986; 1:1077–1081. [PubMed: 2871345] 
47. Barker DJ, Osmond C. Low birth weight and hypertension. BMJ. 1988; 297:134–135.
48. Barker DJ, Thornburg KL. The obstetric origins of health for a lifetime. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 
2013; 56:511–9. [PubMed: 23787713] 
49. Barnabei MS, Palpant NJ, Metzger JM. Influence of genetic background on ex vivo and in vivo 
cardiac function in several commonly used inbred mouse strains. Physiol Genomics. 2010; 
42:103–113.
50. Barone FC, Knudsen DJ, Nelson AH, Feuerstein GZ, Willette RN. Mouse strain differences in 
susceptibility to cerebral ischemia are related to cerebral vascular anatomy. J Cereb Blood Flow 
Metab. 1993; 13:683–692. [PubMed: 8314921] 
51. Barrabes JA, Inserte J, Mirabet M, Quiroga A, Hernando V, Figueras J, Garcia-Dorado D. 
Antagonism of P2Y12 or GPIIb/IIIa receptors reduces platelet-mediated myocardial injury after 
ischaemia and reperfusion in isolated rat hearts. Thromb Haemost. 2010; 104:128–135. [PubMed: 
20431845] 
52. Barth AS, Tomaselli GF. Gene scanning and heart attack risk. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2016; 
26:260–265. [PubMed: 26277204] 
53. Bateson P, Gluckman P, Hanson M. The biology of developmental plasticity and the predictive 
adaptive response hypothesis. J Physiol. 2014; 592:2357–2368. [PubMed: 24882817] 
54. Bauer I, Wanner GA, Rensing H, Alte C, Miescher EA, Wolf B, Pannen BH, Clemens MG, Bauer 
M. Expression pattern of heme oxygenases 1 and 2 in normal and stress-exposed rat liver. 
Hepatology. 1998; 27:829–838. [PubMed: 9500714] 
55. Bauer M, Bauer I. Heme oxygenase-1: Redox regulation and role in the hepatic response to 
oxidative stress. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2002; 4:749–758. [PubMed: 12470502] 
56. Baum M. Role of the kidney in the prenatal and early postnatal programming of hypertension. Am 
J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2010; 29:F235–F247.
57. Baumgartner WA, Williams GM, Fraser CD Jr, Cameron DE, Gardner TJ, Burdick JF, Augustine 
S, Gaul PD, Reitz BA. Cardiopulmonary bypass with profound hypothermia. An optimal 
preservation method for multiorgan procurement. Transplantation. 1989; 47:123–127. [PubMed: 
2643221] 
58. Bautista AP, Meszaros K, Bojta J, Spitzer JJ. Superoxide anion generation in the liver during the 
early stage of endotoxemia in rats. J Leukoc Biol. 1990; 48:123–128. [PubMed: 2164555] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 57
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
59. Baxter GF. The neutrophil as a mediator of myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury: Time to move 
on. Basic Res Cardiol. 2002; 97:268–275. [PubMed: 12111036] 
60. Beldi G, Banz Y, Kroemer A, Sun X, Wu Y, Graubardt N, Rellstab A, Nowak M, Enjyoji K, Li X, 
Junger WG, Candinas D, Robson SC. Deletion of CD39 on natural killer cells attenuates hepatic 
ischemia/reperfusion injury in mice. Hepatology. 2010; 51:1702–1711. [PubMed: 20146261] 
61. Belmont PJ, Chen WJ, San Pedro MN, Thuerauf DJ, Gellings Lowe N, Gude N, Hilton B, 
Wolkowicz R, Sussman MA, Glembotski CC. Roles for endoplasmic reticulum-associated 
degradation and the novel endoplasmic reticulum stress response gene Derlin-3 in the ischemic 
heart. Circ Res. 2010; 106:307–316. [PubMed: 19940266] 
62. Belmont PJ, Chen WJ, Thuerauf DJ, Glembotski CC. Regulation of microRNA expression in the 
heart by the ATF6 branch of the ER stress response. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2012; 53:259–267. 
[PubMed: 22609432] 
63. Benakis C, Brea D, Caballero S, Faraco G, Moore J, Murphy M, Sita G, Racchumi G, Ling L, 
Pamer EG, Iadecola C, Anrather J. Commensal microbiota affects ischemic stroke outcome by 
regulating intestinal gammadelta T cells. Nat Med. 2016; 22:516–523. [PubMed: 27019327] 
64. Ben-Ari Z, Pappo O, Cheporko Y, Yasovich N, Offen D, Shainberg A, Leshem D, Sulkes J, Vidne 
BA, Hochhauser E. Bax ablation protects against hepatic ischemia/reperfusion injury in transgenic 
mice. Liver Transpl. 2007; 13:1181–1188. [PubMed: 17663392] 
65. Benhar M, Forrester MT, Stamler JS. Protein denitrosylation: Enzymatic mechanisms and cellular 
functions. Nat Rev Cell Mol Biol. 2009; 10:21–732.
66. Bernardo BC, Gao XM, Winbanks CE, Boey EJ, Tham YK, Kiriazis H, Gregorevic P, Obad S, 
Kauppinen S, Du XJ, Lin RC, McMullen JR. Therapeutic inhibition of the miR-34 family 
attenuates pathological cardiac remodeling and improves heart function. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A. 2012; 109:17615–17620. [PubMed: 23047694] 
67. Bhatia M, Saluja AK, Hofbauer B, Frossard JL, Lee HS, Castagliuolo I, Wang CC, Gerard N, 
Pothoulakis C, Steer ML. Role of substance P and the neurokinin 1 receptor in acute pancreatitis 
and pancreatitis-associated lung injury. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998; 95:4760–4765. [PubMed: 
9539812] 
68. Bhatt K, Kato M, Natarajan R. Mini-review: Emerging roles of microRNAs in the pathophysiology 
of renal diseases. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2016; 310:F109–118. [PubMed: 26538441] 
69. Bhattacharya K, Farwell K, Huang M, Kempuraj D, Donelan J, Papaliodis D, Vasiadi M, 
Theoharides TC. Mast cell deficient W/Wv mice have lower serum IL-6 and less cardiac tissue 
necrosis than their normal littermates following myocardial ischemia-reperfusion. Int J 
Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2007; 20:69–74.
70. Bianchi P, Kunduzova O, Masini E, Cambon C, Bani D, Raimondi L, Seguelas MH, Nistri S, 
Colucci W, Leducq N, Parini A. Oxidative stress by monoamine oxidase mediates receptor-
independent cardiomyocyte apoptosis by serotonin and postischemic myocardial injury. 
Circulation. 2005; 112:3297–3305. [PubMed: 16286591] 
71. Bilzer M, Roggel F, Gerbes AL. Role of Kupffer cells in host defense and liver disease. Liver Int. 
2006; 26:1175–1186. [PubMed: 17105582] 
72. Bindoli A, Rigobello MP. Principles in redox signaling: From chemistry to functional significance. 
Antioxid Redox Signal. 2013; 18:1557–1593. [PubMed: 23244515] 
73. Birdsall HH, Green DM, Trial J, Youker KA, Burns AR, MacKay CR, LaRosa GJ, Hawkins HK, 
Smith CW, Michael LH, Entman ML, Rossen RD. Complement C5a, TGF-beta 1, and MCP-1, in 
sequence, induce migration of monocytes into ischemic canine myocardium within the first one to 
five hours after reperfusion. Circulation. 1997; 95:684–692. [PubMed: 9024158] 
74. Bjorkegren JL, Kovacic JC, Dudley JT, Schadt EE. Genome-wide significant loci: How important 
are they? Systems genetics to understand heritability of coronary artery disease and other common 
complex disorders. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015; 65:830–845. [PubMed: 25720628] 
75. Black M, Wang W. Ischemic stroke: From next generation sequencing and GWAS to community 
genomics? OMICS. 2015; 19:451–460. [PubMed: 26230531] 
76. Bless NM, Warner RL, Padgaonkar VA, Lentsch AB, Czermak BJ, Schmal H, Friedl HP, Ward PA. 
Roles for C-X-C chemokines and C5a in lung injury after hindlimb ischemia-reperfusion. Am J 
Physiol. 1999; 276:L57–63. [PubMed: 9887056] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 58
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
77. Bliksoen M, Baysa A, Eide L, Bjoras M, Suganthan R, Vaage J, Stenslokken KO, Valen G. 
Mitochondrial DNA damage and repair during ischemia-reperfusion injury of the heart. J Mol Cell 
Cardiol. 2015; 78:9–22. [PubMed: 25446179] 
78. Bliss TM, Kelly S, Shah AK, Foo WC, Kohli P, Stokes C, Sun GH, Ma M, Masel J, Kleppner SR, 
Schallert T, Palmer T, Steinberg GK. Transplantation of hNT neurons into the ischemic cortex: 
Cell survival and effect on sensorimotor behavior. J Neurosci Res. 2006; 83:1004–1014. [PubMed: 
16496370] 
79. Bluhmki E, Chamorro A, Davalos A, Machnig T, Sauce C, Wahlgren N, Wardlaw J, Hacke W. 
Stroke treatment with alteplase given 3.0–4.5 h after onset of acute ischaemic stroke (ECASS III): 
Additional outcomes and subgroup analysis of a randomised controlled trial. Lancet Neurol. 2009; 
8:1095–1102. [PubMed: 19850525] 
80. Bodi V, Marrachelli VG, Husser O, Chorro FJ, Vina JR, Monleon D. Metabolomics in the 
diagnosis of acute myocardial ischemia. J Cardiovasc Transl Res. 2013; 6:808–815. [PubMed: 
23990264] 
81. Boengler K, Schulz R, Heusch G. Loss of cardioprotection with ageing. Cardiovasc Res. 2009; 
83:247–261. [PubMed: 19176601] 
82. Boersma E, Maas AC, Deckers JW, Simoons ML. Early thrombolytic treatment in acute 
myocardial infarction: Reappraisal of the golden hour. Lancet. 1996; 348:771–775. [PubMed: 
8813982] 
83. Bogoyevitch MA, Gillespie-Brown J, Ketterman AJ, Fuller SJ, Ben-Levy R, Ashworth A, Marshall 
CJ, Sugden PH. Stimulation of the stress-activated mitogen-activated protein kinase subfamilies in 
perfused heart. p38/RK mitogen-activated protein kinases and c-Jun N-terminal kinases are 
activated by ischemia/reperfusion. Circ Res. 1996; 79:162–73. [PubMed: 8755992] 
84. Bolli R, Marban E. Molecular and cellular mechanisms of myocardial stunning. Physiol Rev. 1999; 
79:609–663. [PubMed: 10221990] 
85. Bonder CS, Norman MU, Macrae T, Mangan PR, Weaver CT, Bullard DC, McCafferty DM, Kubes 
P. P-selectin can support both Th1 and Th2 lymphocyte rolling in the intestinal microvasculature. 
Am J Pathol. 2005; 167:1647–1660. [PubMed: 16314477] 
86. Boon RA, Dimmeler S. MicroRNAs in myocardial infarction. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2015; 12:135–142. 
[PubMed: 25511085] 
87. Boros P, Bromberg JS. New cellular and molecular immune pathways in ischemia/reperfusion 
injury. Am J Transplant. 2006; 6:652–658. [PubMed: 16539620] 
88. Bortolotto SK, Morrison WA, Han X, Messina A. Mast cells play a pivotal role in ischaemia 
reperfusion injury to skeletal muscles. Lab Invest. 2004; 84:1103–1111. [PubMed: 15184911] 
89. Botker HE, Kharbanda R, Schmidt MR, Bottcher M, Kaltoft AK, Terkelsen CJ, Munk K, Andersen 
NH, Hansen TM, Trautner S, Lassen JF, Christiansen EH, Krusell LR, Kristensen SD, Thuesen L, 
Nielsen SS, Rehling M, Sorensen HT, Redington AN, Nielsen TT. Remote ischaemic conditioning 
before hospital admission, as a complement to angioplasty, and effect on myocardial salvage in 
patients with acute myocardial infarction: A randomised trial. Lancet. 2010; 375:727–34. 
[PubMed: 20189026] 
90. Boujrad H, Gubkina O, Robert N, Krantic S, Susin SA. AIF-mediated programmed necrosis: A 
highly regulated way to die. Cell Cycle. 2007; 6:2612–9. [PubMed: 17912035] 
91. Bozic CR, Lu B, Hopken UE, Gereard C, Berard NP. Neurogenic amplification of immune 
complex inflammation. Science. 1996; 273:1722–1725. [PubMed: 8781237] 
92. Braunersreuther V, Jaquet V. Reactive oxygen species in myocardial reperfusion injury: From 
physiopathology to therapeutic approaches. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2012; 13:97–114. [PubMed: 
21470157] 
93. Bright R, Raval AP, Dembner JM, Pérez-Pinzón MA, Steinberg GK, Yenari MA, Mochly-Rosen D. 
Protein kinase C d mediates cerebral reperfusion injury in vivo. J Neurosci. 2004; 24:6880–6888. 
[PubMed: 15295022] 
94. Broughton BR, Reutens DC, Sobey CG. Apoptotic mechanisms after cerebral ischemia. Stroke. 
2009; 40:e331–e339. [PubMed: 19182083] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 59
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
95. Brown KE, Brunt EM, Heinecke JW. Immunohistochemical detection of myeloperoxidase and its 
oxidation products in Kupffer cells of human liver. Am J Pathol. 2001; 159:2081–2088. [PubMed: 
11733358] 
96. Brown JM, Hazen SL. The gut microbial endocrine organ: Bacterially derived signals driving 
cardiometabolic diseases. Annu Rev Med. 2015; 66:343–359. [PubMed: 25587655] 
97. Bryan NS, Grisham MB. Methods to detect nitric oxide and its metabolites in biological samples. 
Free Radic Biol Med. 2007; 43:645–657. [PubMed: 17664129] 
98. Buckley CD, Ross EA, McGettrick HM, Osborne CE, Haworth O, Schmutz C, Stone PC, Salmon 
M, Matharu NM, Vohra RK, Nash GB, Rainger GE. Identification of a phenotypically and 
functionally distinct population of long-lived neutrophils in a model of reverse endothelial 
migration. J Leukoc Biol. 2006; 79:303–311. [PubMed: 16330528] 
99. Budas GR, Churchill EN, Mochly-Rosen D. Cardioprotective mechanisms of PKC isozyme-
selective activators and inhibitors in the treatment of ischemia-reperfusion injury. Pharmacol Res. 
2007; 55:523–536. [PubMed: 17576073] 
100. Bulkley GB. Free radical-mediated reperfusion injury: A selective review. Br J Cancer Suppl. 
1987; 8:66–73. [PubMed: 3307876] 
101. Burne MJ, Haq M, Matsuse H, Mohapatra S, Rabb H. Genetic susceptibility to renal ischemia 
reperfusion injury revealed in a murine model. Transplantation. 2000; 69:1023–1025. [PubMed: 
10755573] 
102. Burne-Taney MJ, Ascon DB, Daniels F, Racusen L, Baldwin W, Rabb H. B cell deficiency 
confers protection from renal ischemia reperfusion injury. J Immunol. 2003; 171:3210–3215. 
[PubMed: 12960350] 
103. Burne-Taney MJ, Yokota-Ikeda N, Rabb H. Effects of combined T- and B-cell deficiency on 
murine ischemia reperfusion injury. Am J Transplant. 2005; 5:1186–1193. [PubMed: 15888022] 
104. Burns AR, Smith CW, Walker DC. Unique structural features that influence neutrophil emigration 
into the lung. Physiol Rev. 2003; 83:309–336. [PubMed: 12663861] 
105. Cabrera-Fuentes HA, Ruiz-Meana M, Simsekyilmaz S, Kostin S, Inserte J, Saffarzadeh M, 
Galuska SP, Vijayan V, Barba I, Barreto G, Fischer S, Lochnit G, Ilinskaya ON, Baumgart-Vogt 
E, Boning A, Lecour S, Hausenloy DJ, Liehn EA, Garcia-Dorado D, Schluter KD, Preissner KT. 
RNase1 prevents the damaging interplay between extracellular RNA and tumour necrosis factor-
alpha in cardiac ischaemia/reperfusion injury. Thromb Haemost. 2014; 112:1110–1119. 
[PubMed: 25354936] 
106. Caldeira MV, Salazar IL, Curcio M, Canzoniero LM, Duarte CB. Role of the ubiquitin-
proteasome system in brain ischemia: Friend or foe? Prog Neurobiol. 2014; 112:50–69. 
[PubMed: 24157661] 
107. Caldwell CC, Okaya T, Matignoni A, Husted T, Schuster R, Lentsch AB. Divergent functions of 
CD4+ T lymphocytes in acute liver inflammation and injury after ischemia-reperfusion. Am J 
Physiol. 2005; 289:G969–G976.
108. Caldwell-Kenkel JC, Currin RT, Tanaka Y, Thurman PG, Lemasters JJ. Kupffer cell activation and 
endothelial cell damage aftrer storage of rat livers: Effect of reperfusion. Hepatology. 1991; 
13:83–95. [PubMed: 1988348] 
108a. Calvert JW, Lefer DJ, Gundewar S, Poston L, Coetzee WA. Developmental programming 
resulting from maternal obesity in mice: Effects on myocardial ischaemia-reperfusion injury. Exp 
Physiol. 2009; 94:805–814. [PubMed: 19395658] 
109. Candilio L, Hausenloy DJ, Yellon DM. Remote ischemic conditioning: A clinical trial’s update. J 
Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther. 2011; 16:304–312. [PubMed: 21821533] 
110. Cao JY, Dixon SJ. Mechanisms of ferroptosis. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2016; 73:2195–2209. [PubMed: 
27048822] 
111. Cao T, Pinter E, Al-Rasheed S, Gerard N, Hoult JR, Brain SD. Neurokinin-1 receptor agonists are 
involved in mediating neutrophil accumulation in the inflamed, but not normal, cutaneous 
microvasculature: An in vivo study using neurokinin-1 receptor knockout mice. J Immunol. 
2000; 164:5424–5429. [PubMed: 10799908] 
112. Cappola TP, Margulies KB. Functional genomics applied to cardiovascular medicine. Circulation. 
2011; 124:87–94. [PubMed: 21730321] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 60
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
113. Carati CJ. Changes in macromolecular permeability of microvessels in rat small intestine after 
total occlusion ischaemia/reperfusion. Microcirc Endothelium Lymphatics. 1988; 4:69–86. 
[PubMed: 3380065] 
114. Carden DL, Granger DN. Pathophysiology of ischemia-reperfusion injury. J Pathol. 2000; 
190:255–266. [PubMed: 10685060] 
115. Cardinal J, Pan P, Tsung A. Protective role of cisplatin in ischemic liver injury through induction 
of autophagy. Autophagy. 2009; 5:1211–2. [PubMed: 19786828] 
116. Carloni S, Girelli S, Scopa C, Buonocore G, Longini M, Balduini W. Activation of autophagy and 
Akt/CREB signaling play an equivalent role in the neuroprotective effect of rapamycin in 
neonatal hypoxiaischemia. Autophagy. 2010; 6:366–77. [PubMed: 20168088] 
117. Carman CV, Springer TA. A transmigratory cup in leukocyte diapedesis both through individual 
vascular endothelial cells and between them. J Cell Biol. 2004; 167:377–388. [PubMed: 
15504916] 
118. Carpi A, Menabò R, Kaludercic N, Pelicci P, Di Lisa F, Giorgio M. The cardioprotective effects 
elicited by p66(Shc) ablation demonstrate the crucial role of mitochondrial ROS formation in 
ischemia/reperfusion injury. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009; 1787:774–780. [PubMed: 19362067] 
119. Carragher NO. Calpain inhibition: A therapeutic strategy targeting multiple disease states. Curr 
Pharm Des. 2006; 12:615–638. [PubMed: 16472152] 
120. Castello PR, David PS, McClure T, Crook Z, Poyton RO. Mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase 
produces nitic oxide under hypoxic conditions: Implications for oxygen sensing and hypoxic 
sensing in eukaryotes. Cell Metab. 2006; 3:277–287. [PubMed: 16581005] 
121. Cattaruzza F, Cenac N, Barocelli E, Impicciatore M, Rushbrook JI, Zhang M. Protective effect of 
proteinase-activated receptor 2 activation on motility impairment and tissue damage induced by 
intestinal ischemia/reperfusion in rodents. Am J Pathol. 2013; 169:177–188.
122. Cerqueira NF, Hussni CA, Yoshida WB. Pathophysiology of mesenteric ischemia/reperfusion: A 
review. Acta Cir Bras. 2005; 20:336–343. [PubMed: 16186955] 
123. Chacko BK, Kramer PA, Ravi S, Benavides GA, Mitchell T, Dranka BP, Ferrick D, Singal AK, 
Ballinger SW, Bailey SM, Hard RW, Zhang J, Zhi D, Darley-Usmar VM. The Bioenergetic 
Health Index: A new concept in mitochondrial translational research. Clin Sci (Lond). 2014; 
127:367–373. [PubMed: 24895057] 
124. Chaitanya GV, Steven AJ, Babu PP. Molecular PARP-1 cleavage fragments: Signatures of cell-
death proteases in neurodegeneration. Cell Commun Signal. 2010; 8:31. [PubMed: 21176168] 
125. Chamorro A, Meisel A, Planas AM, Urra X, van de Beek D, Veltkamp R. The immunology of 
acute stroke. Nat Rev Neurol. 2012; 8:401–410. [PubMed: 22664787] 
126. Chan MT, Boet R, Ng SC, Poon WS, Gin T. Effect of ischemic preconditioning on brain tissue 
gases and pH during temporary cerebral artery occlusion. Acta Neurochir Suppl. 2005; 95:93–96. 
[PubMed: 16463828] 
127. Charlagorla P, Liu J, Patel M, Rushbrook JI, Zhang M. Loss of plasma membrane integrity, 
complement response and formation of reactive oxygenspecies during early myocardial ischemia/
reperfusion. Mol Immunol. 2013; 56:507–512. [PubMed: 23911407] 
128. Chatterjee PK, Brown PA, Cuzzocrea S, Zacharowski K, Stewart KN, Mota-Filipe H, McDonald 
MC, Thiemermann C. Calpain inhibitor-1 reduces renal ischemia/reperfusion injury in the rat. 
Kidney Int. 2001; 59:2073–2083. [PubMed: 11380809] 
129. Chatterjee PK, Todorovic Z, Sivarajah A, Mota-Filipe H, Brown PA, Stewart KN, Mazzon E, 
Cuzzocrea S, Thiemermann C. Inhibitors of calpain activation (PD150606 and E-64) and renal 
ischemia-reperfusion injury. Biochem Pharmacol. 2005; 69:1121–1131. [PubMed: 15763548] 
130. Chavez-Valdez R, Martin LJ, Flock DL, Northington FJ. Necrostatin-1 attenuates mitochondrial 
dysfunction in neurons and astrocytes following neonatal hypoxia-ischemia. Neuroscience. 2012; 
219:192–203. [PubMed: 22579794] 
131. Chehal MK, Granville DJ. Cytochrome p450 2C (CYP2C) in ischemic heart injury and vascular 
dysfunction. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2006; 84:15–20. [PubMed: 16845886] 
132. Chen C, Feng Y, Zou L, Wang L, Chen HH, Cai JY, Xu JM, Sosnovik DE, Chao W. Role of 
extracellular RNA and TLR3-Trif signaling in myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury. J Am 
Heart Assoc. 2014; 3:e000683. [PubMed: 24390148] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 61
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
133. Chen EP, Bittner HB, Davis RD, Folz RJ, Van Trigt P. Extracellular superoxide dismutase 
transgene overexpression preserves postischemic myocardial function in isolated murine hearts. 
Circulation. 1996; 94:II412–II417. [PubMed: 8901783] 
134. Chen J, Crispín JC, Tedder TF, Dalle Lucca J, Tsokos GC. B cells contribute to ischemia/
reperfusion-mediated injury. J Autoimmunity. 2009; 32:195–200. [PubMed: 19342197] 
135. Chen JC, Wu ML, Huang KC, Lin WW. HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors activate the unfolded 
protein response and induce cytoprotective GRP78 expression. Cardiovasc Res. 2008; 80:138–
150. [PubMed: 18556704] 
136. Chen L, Hahn H, Wu G, Chen CH, Liron T, Schechtman D, Cavallaro G, Banci L, Guo Y, Bolli 
R, Dorn GW II, Mochly-Rosen D. Opposing cardioprotective actions and parallel hypertrophic 
effects of delta PKC and epsilon PKC. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001; 98:11114–11119. 
[PubMed: 11553773] 
137. Chen L, Knowlton AA. Mitochondria and heart failure: New insights into an energetic problem. 
Minerva Cardioangiol. 2010; 58:213–229. [PubMed: 20440251] 
138. Chen M, Won DJ, Krajewski S, Gottlieb RA. Calpain and mitochondria in ischemia/reperfusion 
injury. J Biol Chem. 2002; 277:29181–29186. [PubMed: 12042324] 
139. Chen Y, Wood KJ. Interleukin-23 and Th17 cells in transplantation immunity: Does 23+17 equal 
rejection? Transplant. 2007; 84:1071–1074.
140. Chironi GN, Boulanger CM, Simon A, Dignat-George F, Freyssinet JM, Tedgui A. Endothelial 
microparticles in diseases. Cell Tissue Res. 2009; 335:143–151. [PubMed: 18989704] 
141. Cho YS, Challa S, Moquin D, Genga R, Ray TD, Guildford M, Chan FK. Phosphorylation-driven 
assembly of the RIP1-RIP3 complex regulates programmed necrosis and virus-induced 
inflammation. Cell. 2009; 137:1112–23. [PubMed: 19524513] 
142. Choi DW. The role of glutamate neurotoxicity in hypoxic-ischemic neuronal death. Annu Rev 
Neurosci. 1990; 13:171–182. [PubMed: 1970230] 
143. Chou HC, Cehn YW, Lee TR, Wu FS, Chan HT, Lyu PC, Timms JF, Chan HL. Proteomics study 
of oxidative stress and Src kinase inhibition in H9C2 cardiomyocytes: A cell model of heart 
ischemia-reperfusion injury and treatment. Free Radic Biol Med. 2010; 49:96–108. [PubMed: 
20385227] 
144. Chou WH, Choi DS, Zhang H, Mu D, McMahon T, Kharazia VN, Lowell CA, Ferriero DM, 
Messing RO. Neutrophil protein kinase Cdelta as a mediator of stroke-reperfusion injury. J Clin 
Invest. 2004; 114:49–56. [PubMed: 15232611] 
145. Chouchani ET, Pell VR, Gaude E, Aksentijevic D, Sundier SY, Robb EL, Logan A, Nadtochiy 
SM, Ord EN, Smith AC, Eyassu F, Shirley R, Hu CH, Dare AJ, James AM, Rogatti S, Hartley 
RC, Eaton S, Costa AS, Brookes PS, Davidson SM, Duchen MR, Saeb-Parsy K, Shattock MJ, 
Robinson AJ, Work LM, Frezza C, Krieg T, Murphy MP. Ischaemic accumulation of succinate 
controls reperfusion injury through mitochondrial ROS. Nature. 2014; 515:431–435. [PubMed: 
25383517] 
146. Chouchani ET, Pell VR, James AM, Work LM, Saeb-Parsy K, Frezza C, Krieg T, Murphy MP. A 
Unifying Mechanism for Mitochondrial Superoxide Production during Ischemia-Reperfusion 
Injury. Cell Metab. 2016; 23:254–263. [PubMed: 26777689] 
147. Choudhuri S, Cui Y, Klaassen CD. Molecular targets of epigenetic regulation and effectors of 
environmental influences. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2010; 245:378–393. [PubMed: 20381512] 
148. Churchill EN, Mochly-Rosen D. The roles of PKCdelta and epsilon isoenzymes in the regulation 
of myocardial ischaemia/reperfusion injury. Biochem Soc Trans. 2007; 35:1040–1042. [PubMed: 
17956273] 
149. Clarke SJ, McStay GP, Halestrap AP. Sanglifehrin A acts as a potent inhibitor of the 
mitochondrial permeability transition and reperfusion injury of the heart by binding to 
cyclophilin-D at a different site from cyclosporin A. J Biol Chem. 2002; 277:34793–34799. 
[PubMed: 12095984] 
150. Colletti LM, Cortis A, Lukacs N, Kunkel SL, Green M, Strieter RM. Tumor necrosis factor up-
regulates intercellular adhesion molecule 1, which is important in the neutrophil-dependent lung 
and liver injury associated with hepatic ischemia and reperfusion in the rat. Shock. 1998; 10:182–
191. [PubMed: 9744646] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 62
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
151. Conrad M, Angeli JP, Vandenabeele P, Stockwell BR. Regulated necrosis: Disease relevance and 
therapeutic opportunities. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2016; 15:348–366. [PubMed: 26775689] 
152. Contreras JL, Vilatoba M, Eckstein C, Bilbao G, Anthony Thompson J, Eckhoff DE. Caspase-8 
and caspase-3 small interfering RNA decreases ischemia/reperfusion injury to the liver in mice. 
Surgery. 2004; 136:390–400. [PubMed: 15300206] 
153. Contreras L, Drago I, Zampese E, Pozzan T. Mitochondria: The calcium connection. Biochim 
Biophys Acta. 2010; 1797:607–618. [PubMed: 20470749] 
154. Coombes JS, Powers SK, Hamilton KL, Demirel HA, Shanely RA, Zergerolglu MA, Sen CK, 
Packer L, Ji LL. Improved cardiac performance after ischemia in aged rats supplemented with 
vitamin E and alpha-lipoic acid. Am J Physiol. 2000; 279:R2149–R2155.
155. Cooper D, Chitman KD, Williams MC, Granger DN. Time-dependent platelet-vessel wall 
interactions induced by ischemia-reperfusion. Am J Physiol. 2003; 284:G1027–1033.
156. Cooper D, Russell J, Chitman KD, Williams MC, Wolf RE, Granger DN. Leukocyte dependence 
of platelet adhesion in postcapillary venules. Am J Physiol. 2004; 286:H1895–H1900.
157. Corbucci GG, Perrino C, Donato G, Ricchi A, Lettieri B, Troncone G, Indolfi C, Chiariello M, 
Avvedimento EV. Transient and reversible deoxyribonucleic acid damage in human left ventricle 
under controlled ischemia and reperfusion. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004; 43:1992–1999. [PubMed: 
15172403] 
158. Cording J, Gunther R, Vigolo E, Tscheik C, Winkler L, Schlattner I, Lorenz D, Haseloff RF, 
Schmidt-Ott KM, Wolburg H, Blasig IE. Redox regulation of cell contacts by tricellulin and 
occludin: Redox-sensitive cysteine sites in tricellulin regulate both tri- and bicellular junctions in 
tissue barriers as shown in hypoxia and ischemia. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2015; 23:1035–1049. 
[PubMed: 25919114] 
159. Costa FF. Non-coding RNAs: Meet thy masters. Bioessays. 2010; 32:599–608. [PubMed: 
20544733] 
160. Couchonnal L, Anderson ME. The role of calmodulin kinase II in myocardial physiology and 
disease. Physiology. 2008; 23:151–159. [PubMed: 18556468] 
161. Courties G, Moskowitz MA, Nahrendorf M. The innate immune system after ischemic injury: 
Lessons to be learned from the heart and brain. JAMA Neurol. 2014; 71:233–236. [PubMed: 
24296962] 
162. Creemers EE, Tijsen AJ, Pinto YM. Circulating MicroRNAs: Novel biomarkers and extracellular 
communicators in cardiovascular disease? Circ Res. 2011; 110:483–495.
163. Crissinger KD, Granger DN. Characterization of intestinal collateral blood flow in the developing 
piglet. Pediatr Res. 1988; 24:473–476. [PubMed: 3174291] 
164. Croall DE, Ersfeld K. The calpains: Modular designs and functional diversity. Genome Biol. 
2007; 8:218. [PubMed: 17608959] 
165. Crosson CE, Mani SK, Husain S, Alsarraf O, Menick DR. Inhibition of histone deacetylase 
protects the retina from ischemic injury. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010; 51:3639–3645. 
[PubMed: 20164449] 
166. Cui Z, Scruggs SB, Gilda JE, Ping P, Gomes AV. Regulation of cardiac proteasomes by 
ubiquitination, SUMOylation, and beyond. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2014; 71:32–42. [PubMed: 
24140722] 
167. Czermak BJ, Sarma V, Pierson CL, Warner RL, Huber-Lang M, Bless NM, Schmal H, Friedl HP, 
Ward PA. Protective effects of C5a blockade in sepsis. Nat Med. 1999; 5:788–792. [PubMed: 
10395324] 
168. D’Autréaux B, Toledano MB. ROS as signaling molecules: Mechanisms that generate specificity 
in ROS homeostasis. Nat Mol Cell Biol. 2007; 8:813–824.
169. Daemen MA, van’t Veer C, Denecker G, Heemskerk VH, Wolfs TG, Clauss M, Vandenabeele P, 
Buurman WA. Inhibition of apoptosis induced by ischemia-reperfusion prevents inflammation. J 
Clin Invest. 1999; 104:541–9. [PubMed: 10487768] 
170. Dai H, Korthuis RJ. Mast cell proteases and inflammation. Drug Discov Today Dis Models. 2011; 
8:47–55. [PubMed: 22125569] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 63
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
171. Damle SS, Moore EE, Babu AN, Meng X, Fullerton DA, Banerjee A. Hemoglobin-based oxygen 
carrier induces heme oxygenase-1 in the heart and lung but not brain. J Am Coll Surg. 2009; 
208:592–598. [PubMed: 19476795] 
172. Dan Dunn J, Alvarez LA, Zhang X, Soldati T. Reactive oxygen species and mitochondria: A 
nexus of cellular homeostasis. Redox Biol. 2015; 6:472–485. [PubMed: 26432659] 
173. Das M, Cui J, Das DK. Generation of survival signal by differential interaction of 
p38MAPKalpha and p38MAPKbeta with caveolin-1 and caveolin-3 in the adapted heart. J Mol 
Cell Cardiol. 2007; 42:206–213. [PubMed: 17069850] 
174. De Chiara G, Marcocci ME, Torcia M, Lucibello M, Rosini P, Bonini P, Higashimoto Y, Damonte 
G, Armirotti A, Amodei S, Palamara AT, Russo T, Garaci E, Cozzolino F. Bcl-2 Phosphorylation 
by p38 MAPK: Identification of target sites and biologic consequences. J Biol Chem. 2006; 
281:21353–21361. [PubMed: 16714293] 
175. Degterev A, Huang Z, Boyce M, Li Y, Jagtap P, Mizushima N, Cuny GD, Mitchison TJ, 
Moskowitz MA, Yuan J. Chemical inhibitor of nonapoptotic cell death with therapeutic potential 
for ischemic brain injury. Nat Chem Biol. 2005; 1:112–119. [PubMed: 16408008] 
176. Degterev A, Linkermann A. Generation of small molecules to interfere with regulated necrosis. 
Cell Mol Life Sci. 2016; 73:2251–2267. [PubMed: 27048812] 
177. Deitch EA. Gut lymph and lymphatics: A source of factors leading to organ injury and 
dysfunction. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010; 1207(Suppl 1):E103–111. [PubMed: 20961300] 
178. Deitch EA. Gut-origin sepsis: Evolution of a concept. Surgeon. 2012; 10:350–356. [PubMed: 
22534256] 
179. Deitch EA, Xu D, Kaise VL. Role for the gut in the development of injury- and shock-induced 
SIRS and MODS: The gut-lymph hypothesis, a review. Front Biosci. 2006; 11:520–528. 
[PubMed: 16146750] 
180. Deng Y, Theken KN, Lee CR. Cytochrome P450 epoxygeneases, soluble hydrolase, and the 
regulation of cardiovascular inflammation. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2010; 48:331–341. [PubMed: 
19891972] 
181. DeLeon ER, Gao Y, Huang E, Arif M, Arora N, Divietro A, Patel S, Olson KR. A case of 
mistaken identity: Are reactive oxygen species actually reactive sulfide species? Am J Physiol 
Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2016 [Epub ahead of print]. 
182. de Moura EG, Lisboa PC, Passos MC. Neonatal programming of neuroimmunomodulation—role 
of adipocytokines and neuropeptides. Neuroimmunomodulation. 2008; 15:176–188. [PubMed: 
18781082] 
183. De Pascali F, Hemann C, Samons K, Chen CA, Zweier JL. Hypoxia and reoxygenation induce 
endothelial nitric oxide synthase uncoupling in endothelial cells through tetrahydrobiopterin 
depletion and s-glutathionlyation. Biochemistry. 2014; 53:3679–3688. [PubMed: 24758136] 
184. Depre C, Park JY, Shen YT, Zhao X, Qiu H, Yan L, Tian B, Vatner SF, Vatner DE. Molecular 
mechanisms mediating preconditioning following chronic ischemia differ from those in classical 
second window. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2010; 299:H752–H762. [PubMed: 20581088] 
185. Depre C, Vatner SF. Cardioprotection in stunned and hibernating myocardium. Heart Fail Rev. 
2007; 12:307–317. [PubMed: 17541819] 
186. Depre C, Vatner SF. Mechanisms of cell survival in myocardial hibernation. Trends Cardiovasc 
Med. 2005; 15:101–110. [PubMed: 16039970] 
187. Devalaraja-Narashimha K, Diener AM, Padanilam BJ. Cyclophilin D gene ablation protects mice 
from ischemic renal injury. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2009; 297:F749–F759. [PubMed: 
19553348] 
188. Devaux Y, Mueller M, Haaf P, Goretti E, Twerenbold R, Zangrando J, Vausort M, Reichlin T, 
Wildi K, Moehring B, Wagner DR, Mueller C. Diagnostic and prognostic value of circulating 
microRNAs in patients with acute chest pain. J Intern Med. 2015; 277:260–271. [PubMed: 
24345063] 
189. Devaux Y, Stammet P, Friberg H, Hassager C, Kuiper MA, Wise MP, Nielsen N. MicroRNAs: 
New biomarkers and therapeutic targets after cardiac arrest? Crit Care. 2015; 19:54. [PubMed: 
25886727] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 64
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
190. Devey L, Ferenbach D, Mohr E, Sangster K, Bellamy CO, Hughes J, Wigmore SJ. Tissue-
resistant macrophages protect the liver from ischemia reperfusion injury via a heme oxygenase-1-
dependent mechanism. Mol Ther. 2009; 17:65–72. [PubMed: 19002167] 
191. DeWood MA, Spores J, Notske R, Mouser LT, Burroughs R, Golden MS, Lang HT. Prevalence of 
total coronary occlusion during the early hours of transmural myocardial infarction. N Engl J 
Med. 1980; 303:897–902. [PubMed: 7412821] 
192. Di Lisa F, Canton M, Menabò R, Kaludercic N, Bernardi P. Mitochondria and cardioprotection. 
Heart Fail Rev. 2007; 12:249–60. [PubMed: 17516167] 
193. Di Lisa F, Giorgio M, Ferdinandy P, Schulz R. New aspects of p66Shc in ischemia reperfusion 
injury and cardiovascular diseases. Br J Pharmacol. 2016 [Epub ahead of print]. 
194. Di Lisa F, Kaludercic N, Carpi A, Menabo R, Giorgio M. Mitochondria and vascular pathology. 
Pharmacol Rep. 2009; 61:123–130. [PubMed: 19307700] 
195. Di Lisa F, Kaludercic N, Carpi A, Menabò R, Giorgio M. Mitochondrial pathways for ROS 
formation and myocardial injury: The relevance of p66(Shc) and monoamine oxidase. Basic Res 
Cardiol. 2009; 104:131–139. [PubMed: 19242637] 
196. Di Paola M, Lorusso M. Interaction of free fatty acids with mitochondria: Coupling, uncoupling 
and permeability transition. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006; 1757:1330–1337. [PubMed: 
16697347] 
197. Dinagl U, Iadecola C, Moskowitz MA. Pathobiology of ischemic stroke: An integrated view. 
Trends Neurosci. 1999; 22:391–397. [PubMed: 10441299] 
198. Divald A, Kivity S, Wang P, Hochhauser E, Roberts B, Teichberg S, Gomes AV, Powell SR. 
Myocardial ischemic preconditioning preserves postischemic function of the 26S proteasome 
through diminished oxidative damage to 19S regulatory particle subunits. Circ Res. 2010; 
106:1829–1838. [PubMed: 20431057] 
199. Diwan A, Krenz M, Syed FM, Wansapura J, Ren X, Koesters AG, Li H, Kirshenbaum LA, Hahn 
HS, Robbins J, Jones WK, Dorn GW. Inhibition of ischemic cardiomyocytes apoptosis through 
targeted ablation of Bnip3 restrains postinfarction remodeling in mice. J Clin Invest. 2007; 
117:2825–2833. [PubMed: 17909626] 
200. Dodd-o JM, Hristopoulos ML, Welsh-Servinsky LE, Tankersley CG, Pearse DB. Strain-specific 
differences in sensitivity to ischemia-reperfusion lung injury in mice. J Appl Physiol. 2006; 
100:1590–1595. [PubMed: 16439514] 
201. Donovan N, Becker EB, Konishi Y, Bonni A. JNK phosphorylation and activation of BAD 
couples the stress-activated signaling pathway to the cell death machinery. J Biol Chem. 2002; 
277:40944–40949. [PubMed: 12189144] 
202. Drews O, Wildgruber R, Zong C, Sukop U, Nissum M, Weber G, Gomes AV, Ping P. Mammalian 
proteasome subpopulations with distinct molecular compositions and proteolytic activities. Mol 
Cell Proteomics. 2007; 6:2021–2031. [PubMed: 17660509] 
203. Dreyer WJ, Michael LH, Nguyen T, Smith CW, Anderson DC, Entman ML, Rossen RD. Kinetics 
of C5a release in cardiac lymph of dogs experiencing coronary artery ischemia-reperfusion 
injury. Circ Res. 1992; 71:1518–1524. [PubMed: 1423944] 
204. Duan J, Kasper DL. Oxidative depolymerization of polysaccharides by reactive oxygen/nitrogen 
species. Glycobiology. 2011; 21:401–409. [PubMed: 21030538] 
205. Duffield JS, Forbes SJ, Constantinou CM, Clay S, Partolina M, Vuthoori S, Wu SJ, Wang R, 
Iredale JP. Selective depletion of macrophages reveals distinct, opposing roles during liver injury 
and repair. J Clin Invest. 2005; 115:56–65. [PubMed: 15630444] 
206. Duquesnes N, Lezoualc’h F, Crozatier B. PKC-delta and PKC-epsilon: Foes of the same family or 
strangers? J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2011; 51:665–673. [PubMed: 21810427] 
206a. Dutta P, Nahrendorf M. Monocytes in myocardial infarction. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 
2015; 35:1066–1070. [PubMed: 25792449] 
207. Dvorak AM. Basophils and mast cells: Piecemeal degranulation in situ and ex vivo: A possible 
mechanism for cytokine-induced function in disease. Immunol Ser. 1992; 57:169–271. [PubMed: 
1504138] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 65
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
208. Dvoriantchikova G, Degterev A, Ivanov D. Retinal ganglion cell (RGC) programmed necrosis 
contributes to ischemia-reperfusion-induced retinal damage. Exp Eye Res. 2014; 123:1–7. 
[PubMed: 24751757] 
209. Dworakowski R, Alom-Ruiz SP, Shah AM. NADPH oxidase-derived reactive oxygen species in 
the regulation of endothelial phenotype. Pharmacol Rep. 2008; 60:21–28. [PubMed: 18276982] 
210. Edgerton C, Crispin JC, Moratz CM, Bettelli E, Oukka M, Simovic M, Zacharia A, Egan R, Chen 
J, Dalle Lucca JJ, Juang YT, Tsokos GC. IL-17 producing CD4+ T cells mediate accelerated 
ischemia/reperfusion-induced injury in autoimmunity-prone mice. Clin Immunol. 2009; 
130:313–321. [PubMed: 19058762] 
211. Edin ML, Wang Z, Bradbury JA, Graves JP, Lih FH, DeGraff LM, Foley JF, Torphy R, 
Ronnekleiv OK, Tomer KB, Lee CR, Zeldin DC. Endothelial expression of human cytochrome 
P450 epoxygenase CYP2C8 increases susceptibility to ischemia-reperfusion injury in isolated 
mouse heart. FASEB J. 2011; 25:3436–3447. [PubMed: 21697548] 
211a. Elmes MJ, Gardner DS, Langley-Evans SC. Fetal exposure to a maternal low-protein diet is 
associated with altered left ventricular pressure response to ischaemia-reperfusion injury. Br J 
Nutr. 2007; 98:93–100. [PubMed: 17445339] 
211b. Elmes MJ, McMullen S, Gardner DS, Langley-Evans SC. Prenatal diet determines susceptibility 
to cardiac ischaemia-reperfusion injury following treatment with diethylmaleic acid and N-
acetylcysteine. Life Sci. 2008; 82:149–155. [PubMed: 18062993] 
212. Ellett JD, Atkinson C, Evans ZP, Amani Z, Balish E, Schmid MG, von Rooijen N, Schnellmann 
RG, Chavin KD. Murine Kupffer cells are protective in toal hepatic ischemia/reperfusion injury 
with bowel congestion through IL-10. J Immunol. 2010; 184:5849–5858. [PubMed: 20400698] 
213. Elrod JW, Duranski MR, Langston W, Greer JJ, Tao L, Dugas TR, Kevil CG, Champion HC, 
Lefer DJ. eNOS gene therapy exacerbates hepatic ischemia-reperfusion injury in diabetes: A role 
for eNOS uncoupling. Circ Res. 2006; 99:78–85. [PubMed: 16763164] 
214. Elvington A, Atkinson C, Zhu H, Yu J, Takahashi K, Stahl GL, Kindy MS, Tomlinson S. The 
alternative complement pathway propagates inflammation and injury in murine ischemic stroke. J 
Immunol. 2012; 189:4640–4647. [PubMed: 23028050] 
215. Elzey BD, Tian J, Jensen RJ, Swanson AK, Lees JR, Lentz SR, Stein CS, Neiswandt B, Wang Y, 
Davidson BL, Ratliff TL. Platelet-mediated modulation of adaptive immunity. A communication 
link between innate and adaptive immune compartments. Immunity. 2003; 19:9–19. [PubMed: 
12871635] 
216. Endres M, Ahmadi M, Kruman I, Biniszkiewicz D, Meisel A, Gertz K. Folate deficiency 
increases postischemic brain injury. Stroke. 2005; 36:321–325. [PubMed: 15625295] 
217. Endres M, Fan G, Meisel A, Dirnagl U, Jaenisch R. Effects of cerebral ischemia in mice lacking 
DNA methyltransferase 1 in post-mitotic neurons. Neuroreport. 2001; 12:3763–6. [PubMed: 
11726790] 
218. Endres M, Meisel A, Biniszkiewicz D, Namura S, Prass K, Ruscher K, Lipski A, Jaenisch R, 
Moskowitz MA, Dirnagl U. DNA methyltransferase contributes to delayed ischemic brain injury. 
J Neurosci. 2000; 20:3175–3181. [PubMed: 10777781] 
219. Engler RL, Schmid-Schonbein GW, Pavelec RS. Leukocyte capillary plugging in myocardial 
ischemia and reperfusion in the dog. Am J Pathol. 1983; 111:98–111. [PubMed: 6837725] 
220. Entman ML, Youker K, Shoji T, Kukielka G, Shappell SB, Taylor AA, Smith CW. Neutrophil 
induced oxidative injury of cardiac myocytes. A compartmented system requiring CD11b/CD18-
ICAM-1 adherence. J Clin Invest. 1992; 90:1335–1345. [PubMed: 1357003] 
221. Erickson JR, Joiner MA, Guan X, Kurtschke W, Yang J, Oddis CV, Bartlett RK, Lowe JS, 
O’Donnell SE, Aykin-Burns N, Zimmerman MC, Zimmerman K, Ham A-JL, Weiss RM, Spitz 
DR, Shea MA, Colbran RJ, Mohler PJ, Anderson ME. A dynamic pathway for calciumin-
dependent activation of CaMKII by methionine oxidation. Cell. 2008; 133:462–474. [PubMed: 
18455987] 
222. Erusalimsky JD, Moncada S. Nitric oxide and mitochondrial signaling: From physiology to 
pathophysiology. Arteroscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2007; 27:2524–2531.
223. Esch JS, Jurk K, Knoefel WT, Roeder G, Voss H, Tustas RY, Schmelzle M, Krieg A, Eisenberger 
CF, Topp S, Rogiers X, Fischer L, Aken HV, Kehrel BE. Platelet activation and increased tissue 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 66
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
factor expression on monocytes in reperfusion injury following orthotopic liver transplantation. 
Platelets. 2010; 21:348–359. [PubMed: 20569187] 
224. Esme H, Fidan H, Koken T, Solak O. Effect of lung ischemia-reperfusion on oxidative stress 
parameters of remote tissues. Eur J CardioCardio-Thoracic Surg. 2006; 29:294–298.
225. Ettinger G, MacDonald K, Reid G, Burton JP. The influence of the human microbiome and 
probiotics on cardiovascular Health. Gut Microbes. 2014; 5:719–728. [PubMed: 25529048] 
226. Fagundes CT, Amaral FA, Teixeira AL, Souza DG, Teixeira MM. Adapting to environmental 
stresses: The role of the microbiota in controlling innate immunity and behavioral responses. 
Immunol Rev. 2012; 245:250–264. [PubMed: 22168425] 
227. Faith JJ, Guruge JL, Charbonneau M, Subramanian S, Seedorf H, Goodman AL, Clemente JC, 
Knight R, Heath AC, Leibel RL, Rosenbaum M, Gordon JI. The long-term stability of the human 
gut microbiota. Science. 2013; 341:1237439. [PubMed: 23828941] 
228. Fan M, Du L, Stone AA, Gilbert KM, Chambers TC. Modulation of mitogen-activated protein 
kinases and phosphorylation of Bcl-2 by vinblastine represent persistent forms of normal 
fluctuations at G2-M1. Cancer Res. 2000; 60:6403–6407. [PubMed: 11103805] 
229. Fang J, Song XW, Tian J, Chen HY, Li DF, Wang JF, Ren AJ, Yuan WJ, Lin L. Overexpression of 
microRNA-378 attenuates ischemia-induced apoptosis by inhibiting caspase-3 expression in 
cardiac myocytes. Apoptosis. 2012; 17:410–423. [PubMed: 22119805] 
230. Faraco G, Pancani T, Formentini L, Mascagni P, Fossati G, Leoni F, Moroni F, Chiarugi A. 
Pharmacological inhibition of histone deacetylases by suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid 
specifically alters gene expression and reduces ischemic injury in the mouse brain. Mol 
Pharmacol. 2006; 70:1876–1884. [PubMed: 16946032] 
231. Fasanaro P, Greco S, Ivan M, Capogrossi MC, Martelli F. microRNA: Emerging therapeutic 
targets in acute ischemic diseases. Pharmacol Ther. 2010; 125:92–104. [PubMed: 19896977] 
232. Fatokun AA, Dawson VL, Dawson TM. Parthanatos: Mitochondrial-linked mechanisms and 
therapeutic opportunities. Br J Pharmacol. 2014; 171:2000–2016. [PubMed: 24684389] 
233. Fauman EB, Saper MA. Structure and function of the protein tyrosine phosphatases. Trends 
Biochem Sci. 1996; 21:413–417. [PubMed: 8987394] 
234. Fayaz SM, Suvanish Kumar VS, Davis CK, Rajanikant GK. Novel RIPK3 inhibitors discovered 
through a structure-based approach exert post-ischemic neuroprotection. Mol Divers. 2016; 
20:719–728. [PubMed: 26873246] 
235. Fayaz SM, Suvanish Kumar VS, Rajanikant GK. Necroptosis: Who knew there were so many 
interesting ways to die? CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2014; 13:42–51. [PubMed: 24152329] 
235a. Felger JC, Abe T, Kaunzner UW, Gottfried-Blackmore A, Gal-Toth J, McEwen BS, Iadecola C, 
Bulloch K. Brain dendritic cells in ischemic stroke: Time course, activation state, and origin. 
Brain Behav Immun. 2010; 24:724–737. [PubMed: 19914372] 
236. Feng M, Wang H, Wang Q, Guan W. Matrix metalloprotease 9 promotes liver recovery from 
ischemia and reperfusion injury. J Surg Res. 2013; 180:156–161. [PubMed: 23157925] 
237. Ferdinandy P, Schulz R, Baxter GF. Interaction of cardiovascular risk factors with myocardial 
ischemia/reperfusion injury, preconditioning, and postconditioning. Pharmacol Rev. 2007; 
59:418–458. [PubMed: 18048761] 
238. Fernandez-Klett F, Offenhauser N, Dirnagl U, Priller J, Lindauer U. Pericytes in capillaries are 
contractile in vivo, but arterioles mediate functional hyperemia in the mouse brain. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA. 2010; 107:22290–22295. [PubMed: 21135230] 
239. Ferran C, Millan MT, Csizmadia V, Cooper JT, Brostjan C, Bach FH, Winkler H. Inhibition of 
NF-kappa B by pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate blocks endothelial cell activation. Biochem Biophys 
Res Comm. 1995; 214:212–223. [PubMed: 7545393] 
240. Ferraro FJ, Rush BF Jr, Simonian GT, Bruce CJ, Murphy TF, Hsieh JT, Klein K, Condon M. A 
comparison of survival at different degrees of hemorrhagic shock in germ-free and germ-bearing 
rats. Shock. 1995; 4:117–120. [PubMed: 7496896] 
241. Festjens N, Vanden Berghe T, Cornelis S, Vandenabeele P. RIP1, a kinase on the crossroads of a 
cell’s decision to live or die. Cell Death Differ. 2007; 14:400–410. [PubMed: 17301840] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 67
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
242. Finsterbusch M, Voisin MB, Beyrau M, Williams TJ, Nourshargh S. Neutrophils recruited by 
chemoattractants in vivo induce microvascular plasma protein leakage through secretion of TNF. 
J Exp Med. 2014; 211:1307–1314. [PubMed: 24913232] 
243. Fleming I, Michaelis UR, Bredenkötter D, Fisslthaler B, Dehghani F, Brandes RP, Busse R. 
Endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor synthase (cytochrome P450 2C9) is a functionally 
significant source of reactive oxygen species in coronary arteries. Circ Res. 2001; 88:44–51. 
[PubMed: 11139472] 
244. Folino A, Losano G, Rastaldo R. Balance of nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species in 
myocardial reperfusion injury and protection. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2013; 62:567–575. 
[PubMed: 23921313] 
245. Ford DA. Lipid oxidation by hypochlorous acid: Chlorinated lipids in atherosclerosis and 
myocardial ischemia. Clin Lipidol. 2010; 5:835–852. [PubMed: 21339854] 
246. Forman HJ, Fukoto JM, Miller T, Zhang H, Rinna A, Levy S. The chemistry of cell signaling by 
reactive oxygen and nitrogen species and 4-hydroxynonenal. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2008; 
477:183–195. [PubMed: 18602883] 
247. Forman HJ, Torre M, Fukoto J. Redox signaling. Mol Cell Biochem. 2002; 234:49–62. [PubMed: 
12162460] 
248. Foster MW, Hess DT, Stamler JS. Protein S-nitrosylation in health and disease: A current 
perspective. Trends Mol Med. 2009; 15:391–404. [PubMed: 19726230] 
249. Frangogiannis NG. Inflammation in cardiac injury, repair and regeneration. Curr Opin Cardiol. 
2015; 30:240–245. [PubMed: 25807226] 
250. Frangogiannis NG. The immune system and cardiac repair. Pharmacol Res. 2008; 58:88–111. 
[PubMed: 18620057] 
251. Friedmann Angeli JP, Schneider M, Proneth B, Tyurina YY, Tyurin VA, Hammond VJ, Herbach 
N, Aichler M, Walch A, Eggenhofer E, Basavarajappa D, Radmark O, Kobayashi S, Seibt T, 
Beck H, Neff F, Esposito I, Wanke R, Forster H, Yefremova O, Heinrichmeyer M, Bornkamm 
GW, Geissler EK, Thomas SB, Stockwell BR, O’Donnell VB, Kagan VE, Schick JA, Conrad M. 
Inactivation of the ferroptosis regulator Gpx4 triggers acute renal failure in mice. Nat Cell Biol. 
2014; 16:1180–1191. [PubMed: 25402683] 
252. Fritzinger DC, Hew BE, Lee JQ, Newhouse J, Alam M, Ciallella JR, Bowers M, Gorsuch WB, 
Guikema BJ, Stahl GL, Vogel CW. Derivatives of human complement component C3 for 
therapeutic complement depletion: A novel class of therapeutic agents. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2008; 
632:293–307. [PubMed: 19025130] 
253. Frost RJ, van Rooij E. miRNAs as therapeutic targets in ischemic heart disease. J Cardiovasc 
Transl Res. 2010; 3:280–289. [PubMed: 20560049] 
254. Fulda S. Regulation of necroptosis signaling and cell death by reactive oxygen species. Biol 
Chem. 2016; 397:657–660. [PubMed: 26918269] 
255. Gaboury JP, Johnston B, Niu X, Kubes P. Mechanisms nderlying acute mast cell-induced 
leukocyte rolling and adhesion in vivo. J Immunol. 1995; 154:804–813. [PubMed: 7814884] 
256. Galinanes M, Hearse DJ. Species differences in susceptibility to ischemic injury and 
responsiveness to myocardial protection. Cardioscience. 1990; 1:127–143. [PubMed: 2102801] 
257. Galli SJ, Gordon JR, Wershil BK. Cytokine production by mast cells and basophils. Curr Opin 
Immunol. 1991; 3:865–872. [PubMed: 1793528] 
258. Galli SJ, Kalesnikoff J, Grimbaldeston A, Piliponsky A, Williams C, Tsai M. Mast cellsare 
“tunable’ effector and immunoregulatory cells: Recent advances. Annu Rev Immunol. 2005; 
23:749–786. [PubMed: 15771585] 
259. Galluzzi L, Kepp O, Krautwald S, Kroemer G, Linkermann A. Molecular mechanisms of 
regulated necrosis. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2014; 35:24–32. [PubMed: 24582829] 
260. Gan XT, Ettinger G, Huang CX, Burton JP, Haist JV, Rajapurohitam V, Sidaway JE, Martin G, 
Gloor GB, Swann JR, Reid G, Karmazyn M. Probiotic administration attenuates myocardial 
hypertrophy and heart failure after myocardial infarction in the rat. Circ Heart Fail. 2014; 7:491–
499. [PubMed: 24625365] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 68
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
261. Gandalfo MT, Jang HR, Bagnasco SM, Ko GJ, Agreda P, Satpute SR, Crow MT, King LS, Rabb 
H. Foxp3 +regulatory T cells participate in repair of ischemic acute kidney injury. Kidney Int. 
2009; 76:717–729. [PubMed: 19625990] 
262. Gao X, Zhang H, Belmadani S, Wu J, Xu X, Elford H, Potter BJ, Zhang C. Role of TNF-alpha-
induced reactive oxygen species in endothelial dysfunction during reperfusion injury. Am J 
Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2008; 295:H2242–2249. [PubMed: 18849334] 
263. Gawaz M. Role of platelets in coronary thrombosis and reperfusion of ischemic myocardium. 
Cardiovasc Res. 2004; 61:498–511. [PubMed: 14962480] 
264. Ge L, Zhou X, Ji WJ, Lu RY, Zhang Y, Zhang YD, Ma YQ, Zhao JH, Li YM. Neutrophil 
extracellular traps in ischemia-reperfusion injury-induced myocardial no-reflow: Therapeutic 
potential of DNase-based reperfusion strategy. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2015; 
308:H500–H509. [PubMed: 25527775] 
265. Genken E, Buis CI, Visser DS, Blokzijl H, Moshage H, Nemes B, Leuvenink HG, de Jong KP, 
Peeters PM, Slooff MJ, Porte RJ. Expression of heme oxygenase-1 in human livers before 
transplantation correlates with graft injury and function after transplantation. Am J Transplant. 
2005; 5:1875–1885. [PubMed: 15996234] 
266. George FD. Microparticles in vascular diseases. Thromb Res. 2008; 122:555–559.
267. Gerszten RE, Asnani A, Carr SA. Status and prospects for discovery and verification of new 
biomarkers of cardiovascular disease by proteomics. Circ Res. 2011; 109:463–474. [PubMed: 
21817166] 
268. Giakoustidis DE, Iliadis S, Tsantilas D, Papageorgiou G, Kontos N, Kostopoulou E, Botsoglou 
NA, Gerasimidis T, Dimitriadou A. Blockade of Kupffer cells by gadolinium chloride reduces 
lipid peroxidation and protects liver from ischemia/reperfusion injury. Hepatogastroenterology. 
2003; 50:1587–1592. [PubMed: 14571792] 
268a. Giussani DA, Camm EJ, Niu Y, Richter HG, Blanco CE, Gottschalk R, Blake EZ, Horder KA, 
Thakor AS, Hansell JA, Kane AD, Wooding FB, Cross CM, Herrera EA. Developmental 
programming of cardiovascular dysfunction by prenatal hypoxia and oxidative stress. PLoS One. 
2012; 7:e31017. [PubMed: 22348036] 
268b. Giussani DA, Davidge ST. Developmental programming of cardiovascular disease by prenatal 
hypoxia. J Develop Origins Health Dis. 2013; 4:328–337.
269. Giedt RJ, Yang C, Zweier JL, Matzavinos A, Alevriadou BR. Mitochondrial fission in endothelial 
cells after simulated ischemia/reperfusion: Role of nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species. Free 
Radic Biol Med. 2012; 52:348–356. [PubMed: 22100972] 
270. Glancy B, Hartnell LM, Malide D, Yu ZX, Combs CA, Connelly PS, Subramaniam S, Balaban 
RS. Mitochondrial reticulum for cellular energy distribution in muscle. Nature. 2015; 523:617–
620. [PubMed: 26223627] 
271. Gnecchi M, Zhang Z, Ni A, Dzau VJ. Paracrine mechanisms in adult stem cell signaling and 
therapy. Circ Res. 2008; 103:1204–1219. [PubMed: 19028920] 
272. Go YM, Jones DP. Intracellular proatherogenic events and cell adhesion modulated by 
extracellular thiol/disulfide redox state. Circulation. 2005; 111:2973–2980. [PubMed: 15927968] 
273. Go YM, Jones DP. Redox compartmentalization in eukaryotic cells. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008; 
1780:1273–1290. [PubMed: 18267127] 
274. Go YM, Park H, Koval M, Orr M, Reed M, Liang Y, Smith D, Pohl J, Jones DP. A key role for 
mitochondria in endothelial signaling by plasma cysteine/cystine redox potential. Free Radic Biol 
Med. 2010; 48:275–283. [PubMed: 19879942] 
275. Goda N, Suzuki K, Naito M, Takeoka S, Tsuchida E, Ishimura Y, Tamatani T, Suematsu M. 
Distribution of heme oxygenase isoforms in rat liver. Topographic basis for carbon monoxide-
mediated microvascular relaxation. J Clin Invest. 1998; 101:604–612. [PubMed: 9449694] 
276. Godoy LC, Moretti AI, Jurado MC, Oxer D, Janiszewski M, Ckless K, Velasco IT, Laurindo FR, 
Souza HP. Loss of CD40 endogenous S-nitrosylation during inflammatory response in 
endotoxemic mice and patients with sepsis. Shock. 2010; 33:626–633. [PubMed: 20473113] 
277. Godwin JG, Ge X, Stephan K, Jurisch A, Tullius SG, Iacomini J. Identification of a microRNA 
signature of renal ischemia reperfusion injury. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 107:14339–
14344. [PubMed: 20651252] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 69
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
278. Goldman G, Welbourn R, Klausne JM, Kobzik L, Valeri CR, Shepro D, Hechtman HB. Mast cells 
and leukotrienes mediate neutrophil sequestration and lung edema after remote ischemia in 
rodents. Surgery. 1992; 12:578–586.
279. Golwala NH, Hodenette C, Murthy SN, Nossaman BD, Kadowitz PJ. Vascular responses to nitrite 
are mediated by xanthine oxidoreductase and mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase in the rat. 
Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2009; 87:1095–1101. [PubMed: 20029546] 
280. Gonzalez LM, Moeser AJ, Blikslager AT. Animal models of ischemia-reperfusion-induced 
intestinal injury: Progress and promise for translational research. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver 
Physiol. 2015; 308:G63–75. [PubMed: 25414098] 
281. Goretti E, Wagner DR, Devaux Y. miRNAs as biomarkers of myocardial infarction: A step 
forward towards personalized medicine? Trends Mol Med. 2014; 20:716–725. [PubMed: 
25457620] 
282. Gorsuch WB, Chrysanthou E, Schwaeble WJ, Stahl GL. The complement system in ischemia-
reperfusion injuries. Immunobiology. 2012; 217:1026–1033. [PubMed: 22964228] 
283. Gottlieb RA. Cytochrome P450: Major player in reperfusion injury. Arch Biochem Biophys. 
2003; 420:262–267. [PubMed: 14654065] 
284. Gottlieb RA, Gustafsson AB. Mitochondrial turnover in the heart. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011; 
1813:1295–1301. [PubMed: 21147177] 
285. Gottlieb RA, Mentzer RM. Autophagy during cardiac stress: Joys and frustrations of autophagy. 
Annu Rev Physiol. 2010; 72:45–59. [PubMed: 20148666] 
286. Gould TJ, Vu TT, Swystun LL, Dwivedi DJ, Mai SH, Weitz JI, Liaw PC. Neutrophil extracellular 
traps promote thrombin generation through platelet-dependent and platelet-independent 
mechanisms. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014; 34:1977–1984. [PubMed: 25012129] 
287. Gourdin MJ, Bree B, De Kock M. The impact of ischaemia-reperfusion on the blood vessel. Eur J 
Anaesthesiol. 2009; 26:537–547. [PubMed: 19412112] 
288. Gracanin M, Lam MA, Morgan PE, Rodgers KJ, Hawkins CL, Davies MJ. Amino acid, peptide, 
and protein hydroperoxides and their decomposition products modify the activity of the 26S 
proteasome. Free Radic Biol Med. 2011; 50:389–399. [PubMed: 21111806] 
289. Granger A, Abdullah I, Huebner F, Stout A, Wang T, Huebner T, Epstein JA, Gruber PJ. Histone 
deacetylase inhibition reduces myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury in mice. FASEB J. 2008; 
22:3549–3560. [PubMed: 18606865] 
290. Granger DN. Role of xanthine oxidase and granulocytes in ischemia-reperfusion injury. Am J 
Physiol. 1988; 255:H1269–H1275. [PubMed: 3059826] 
291. Granger DN. Ischemia-reperfusion: Mechanisms of microvascular dysfunction and the influence 
of risk factors for cardiovascular disease. Microcirculation. 1999; 6:167–178. [PubMed: 
10501090] 
292. Granger DN, Korthuis RJ. Physiologic mechanisms of postischemic tissue injury. Ann Rev 
Physiol. 1996; 57:311–332.
293. Granger DN, Kvietys PR. Reperfusion injury and reactive oxygen species: The evolution of a 
concept. Redox Biol. 2015; 6:524–551. [PubMed: 26484802] 
294. Granger DN, Rutili G, McCord JM. Superoxide radicals in feline intestinal ischemia. 
Gastroenterology. 1981; 81:22–29. [PubMed: 6263743] 
295. Granger DN, Stokes KY, Shigematsu T, Cerwinka WH, Tailor A, Krieglstein CF. Splanchnic 
ischaemia-reperfusion injury: Mechanistic insights provided by mutant mice. Acta Physiol 
Scand. 2001; 173:83–91. [PubMed: 11678730] 
296. Granville DJ, Tashakkor B, Takeuchi C, Gustafsson ÅB, Sayen MR, Wentworth P Jr, Yeager M, 
Gottlieb RA. Reduction of ischemia and reperfusion-induced myocardial damage by cytochrome 
P450 inhibitors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004; 101:1321–1326. [PubMed: 14734800] 
297. Greco S, De Simone M, Colussi C, Zaccagnini G, Fasanaro P, Pescatori M, Cardani R, Perbellini 
R, Isaia E, Sale P, Meola G, Capogrossi MC, Gaetano C, Martelli F. Common micro-RNA 
signature in skeletal muscle damage and regeneration induced by Duchenne muscular dystrophy 
and acute ischemia. FASEB J. 2009; 23:3335–3346. [PubMed: 19528256] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 70
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
298. Gregory JC, Buffa JA, Org E, Wang Z, Levison BS, Zhu W, Wagner MA, Bennett BJ, Li L, 
DiDonato JA, Lusis AJ, Hazen SL. Transmission of atherosclerosis susceptibility with gut 
microbial transplantation. J Biol Chem. 2015; 290:5647–5660. [PubMed: 25550161] 
299. Grimbaldeston MA, Nakae S, Kalesnikoff J, Tsai M, Galli S. Mast cell-derived interleukin 10 
limits skin pathology in contact dermatitis and chronic irradiation with ultraviolet B. Nature 
Immunol. 2007; 8:1095–1104. [PubMed: 17767162] 
300. Grisham MB, Jourd’Heuil D, Wink DA. Nitric oxide. I. Physiological chemistry of nitric oxide 
and its metabolites: Implications in inflammation. Am J Physiol. 1999; 276:G315–G321. 
[PubMed: 9950804] 
301. Grootjans J, Lenaerts K, Derikx JP, Matthijsen RA, de Bruine AP, van Bijnen AA, van Dam RM, 
Dejong CH, Buurman WA. Human intestinal ischemia-reperfusion-induced inflammation 
characterized: Experiences from a new translational model. Am J Pathol. 2010; 176:2283–2291. 
[PubMed: 20348235] 
302. Gross GJ, Falk JR, Gross ER, Isbell M, Moore J, Nithipatikom K. Cytochrome P450 and 
arachidonic acid metabolites: Role in myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury revisited. 
Cardiovasc Res. 2005; 68:18–25. [PubMed: 15993870] 
303. Grover GJ, Atwal KS, Sleph PG, Wang FL, Monshizadegan H, Monticello T, Green DW. 
Excessive ATP hydrolysis in ischemic myocardium by mitochondrial F1F0-ATPase: Effect of 
selective pharmacological inhibition of mitochondrial ATPase hydrolase activity. Am J Physiol 
Heart Circ Physiol. 2004; 287:H1747–H1755. [PubMed: 15371268] 
304. Grueter CE, Abiria SA, Dzhura I, Wu Y, Ham AJ, Mohler PJ, Anderson ME, Colbran RJ. L-type 
Ca2+ channel facilitation mediated by phosphorylation of the b subunit by CaMKII. Mol Cell. 
2006; 23:641–650. [PubMed: 16949361] 
305. Guan QH, Pei DS, Zhang QG, Hao ZB, Xu TL, Zhang GY. The neuroprotective action of 
SP600125, a new inhibitor of JNK, on transient brain ischemia/reperfusion-induced neuronal 
death in rat hippocampal CA1 via nuclear and non-nuclear pathways. Brain Res. 2005; 1035:51–
59. [PubMed: 15713276] 
306. Gundewar S, Calvert JW, Elrod JW, Lefer DJ. Cytoprotective effects of N,N,N-
trimethylsphingosine during ischemia- reperfusion injury are lost in the setting of obesity and 
diabetes. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2007; 293:H2462–H2471. [PubMed: 17630348] 
307. Guo G, Bhat NR. p38a MAP kinase mediates hypoxia-induced motor neuron cell death: A 
potential target of minocycline’s neuroprotective action. Neurochem Res. 2007; 32:2160–6. 
[PubMed: 17594516] 
308. Guo Y, Flaherty MP, Wu WJ, Tan W, Zhu X, Li Q, Bolli R. Genetic background, gender, age, 
body temperature, and arterial blood pH have a major impact on myocardial infarct size in the 
mouse and need to be carefully measured and/or taken into account: Results of a comprehensive 
analysis of determinants of infarct size in 1,074 mice. Basic Res Cardiol. 2012; 107:288. 
[PubMed: 22864681] 
309. Gurusamy N, Lekli I, Gherghiceanu M, Popescu LM, Das DK. BAG-1 induces autophagy for 
cardiac cell survival. Autophagy. 2009; 5:120–121. [PubMed: 19001866] 
310. Gute DC, Ishida T, Yarimizu K, Korthuis RJ. Inflammatory responses to ischemia and reperfusion 
in skeletal muscle. Mol Cell Biochem. 1998; 179:169–187. [PubMed: 9543359] 
311. Gute, D., Korthuis, RJ. Role of leukocyte adherence in reperfusion-induced microvascular 
dysfunction and tissue injury. In: Granger, DN., Schmid-Schönbein, GW., editors. Leukocyte 
Adhesion. New York, NY: Oxford Uuniversity Press; 1995. 
312. Gysembergh A, Margonari H, Loufoua J, Ovize A, Andre-Fouet X, Minaire Y, Ovize M. Stretch-
induced protection shares a common mechanism with ischemic preconditioning in rabbit heart. 
Am J Physiol. 1998; 274:H955–H964. [PubMed: 9530209] 
313. Hacke W, Donnan G, Fieschi C, Kaste M, von Kummer R, Broderick JP, Brott T, Frankel M, 
Grotta JC, Haley EC Jr, Kwiatkowski T, Levine SR, Lewandowski C, Lu M, Lyden P, Marler JR, 
Patel S, Tilley BC, Albers G, Bluhmki E, Wilhelm M, Hamilton S. Association of outcome with 
early stroke treatment: Pooled analysis of ATLANTIS, ECASS, and NINDS rt-PA stroke trials. 
Lancet. 2004; 363:768–74. [PubMed: 15016487] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 71
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
314. Haheim LL, Olsen I, Ronningen KS. Oral infection, regular alcohol drinking pattern, and 
myocardial infarction. Med Hypotheses. 2012; 79:725–730. [PubMed: 22998953] 
315. Hales CN, Barker DJ. The thrifty phenotype hypothesis. Br Med Bull. 2001; 60:5–20. [PubMed: 
11809615] 
316. Halestrap AP. A pore way to die: The role of mitochondria in reperfusion injury and 
cardioprotection. Biochem Soc Trans. 2010; 38:841–860. [PubMed: 20658967] 
317. Halestrap AP. What is the mitochondrial permeability transition pore? J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2009; 
46:821–31. [PubMed: 19265700] 
318. Hall CN, Reynell C, Gesslein B, Hamilton NB, Mishra A, Sutherland BA, O’Farrell FM, Buchan 
AM, Lauritzen M, Attwell D. Capillary pericytes regulate cerebral blood flow in health and 
disease. Nature. 2014; 508:55–60. [PubMed: 24670647] 
319. Haller H, Kunzendorf U, Sacherer K, Lindschau C, Walz G, Distler A, Luft FC. T cell adhesion to 
P-selectin induces tyrosine phosphorylation of pp125 focal adhesion kinase and other substrates. 
J Immunol. 1997; 158:1061–1067. [PubMed: 9013943] 
320. Hamacher-Brady A, Brady NR, Logue SE, Sayen MR, Jinno M, Kirshenbaum LA, Gottlieb RA, 
Gustafsson AB. Response to myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury involves Bnip3 and 
autophagy. Cell Death Differ. 2007; 14:146–157. [PubMed: 16645637] 
321. Hamilton NB, Attwell D, Hall CN. Pericyte-mediated regulation of capillary diameter: A 
component of neurovascular coupling in health and disease. Front Neuroenergetics. 2010:5. pii. 
[PubMed: 20725515] 
322. Hanidziar D, Koulmanda M. Inflammation and the balance of Treg and Th17 cells in transplant 
rejection and tolerance. Curr Opin Organ Transplant. 2010; 15:411–415. [PubMed: 20613526] 
323. Hanschen M, Zahler S, Krombach F, Khandoga A. Reciprocal activation between CD4+ T cells 
and Kupffer cells during hepatic ischemia-reperfusion. Transplant. 2008; 86:710–718.
324. Hanson MA, Gluckman PD. Early developmental conditioning of later health and disease: 
Physiology or pathophysiology? Physiol Rev. 2014; 94:1027–1076. [PubMed: 25287859] 
325. Harding SJ, Browne GJ, Miller BW, Prigent SA, Dickens M. Activation of ASK1, downstream 
MAPKK and MAPK isoforms during cardiac ischaemia. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010; 
1802:733–740. [PubMed: 20550965] 
326. Hariharan N, Zhai P, Sadoshima J. Oxidative stress stimulates autophagic flux during ischemia/
reperfusion. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2011; 14:2179–2190. [PubMed: 20812860] 
327. Hausenloy DJ, Yellon DM. Survival kinases in ischemic preconditioning and postconditioning. 
Cardiovasc Res. 2006; 70:240–253. [PubMed: 16545352] 
327a. Hauton D. Hypoxia in early pregnancy induces cardiac dysfunction in adult offspring of Rattus 
norvegicus, a non-hypoxia-adapted species. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Comp Physiol. 
2012; 163:278–285.
327b. Hauton D, Ousley V. Prenatal hypoxia induces increased cardiac contractility on a background of 
decreased capillary density. BMC Cardivasc Disord. 2009; 9:1.
328. Hausenloy DJ, Yellon DM. Myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury: A neglected therapeutic 
target. J Clin Invest. 2013; 123:92–100. [PubMed: 23281415] 
329. Hausenloy DJ, Yellon DM, Mani-Babu S, Duchen MR. Preconditioning protects by inhibiting the 
mitochondrial permeability transition. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2004; 287:H841–849. 
[PubMed: 15072953] 
330. He B, Xiao J, Ren AJ, Zhang YF, Zhang H, Chen M, Xie B, Gao XG, Wang YW. Role of miR-1 
and miR-133a in myocardial ischemic postconditioning. J Biomed Sci. 2011; 18:22. [PubMed: 
21406115] 
331. He C, Klionsky DJ. Regulation mechanisms and signaling pathways of autophagy. Annu Rev 
Genet. 2009; 43:67–93. [PubMed: 19653858] 
332. He GZ, Dong LG, Chen XF, Zhou KG, Shu H. Lymph duct ligation during ischemia/reperfusion 
prevents pulmonary dysfunction in a rat model with omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid and 
glutamine. Nutrition. 2011; 27:604–614. [PubMed: 20817408] 
333. He S, Wang L, Miao L, Wang T, Du F, Zhao L, Wang X. Receptor interacting protein kinase-3 
determines cellular necrotic response to TNF-alpha. Cell. 2009; 137:1100–11. [PubMed: 
19524512] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 72
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
334. Hehner SP, Breitkreutz R, Shubinsky G, Unsoeld H, Shulze-Osthoff K, Schmitz ML, Dröge W. 
Enhancement of T cell receptor signaling by a mild oxidative shift in the intracellular thiol pool. J 
Immunol. 2000; 165:4319–4328. [PubMed: 11035067] 
335. Hein TW, Zhang C, Wang W, Chang CI, Thengchaisri N, Kuo L. Ischemia-reperfusion selectively 
impairs nitric oxide-mediated dilation in coronary arterioles: Counteracting role of arginase. 
FASEB J. 2003; 17:2328–2330. [PubMed: 14563685] 
336. Hernandez LA, Grisham MB, Twohig B, Arfors KE, Harlan JM, Granger DN. Role of neutrophils 
in ischemia-reperfusion-induced microvascular injury. Am J Physiol. 1987; 253:H699–H703. 
[PubMed: 3631303] 
337. Hernando V, Inserte J, Sartório CL, Parra VM, Poncelas-Nozal M, Garcia-Dorado D. Calpain 
translocation and activation as pharmacological targets during myocardial ischemia/reperfusion. J 
Mol Cell Cardiol. 2010; 49:271–279. [PubMed: 20211186] 
338. Hess DT, Stamler JS. Regulation by S-nitrosylation of protein posttranslational modification. J 
Biol Chem. 2012; 287:4411–4418. [PubMed: 22147701] 
339. Hickey MJ, Kubes P. Role of nitric oxide in regulation of leucocyte-endothelial cell interactions. 
Exp Physiol. 1997; 82:339–348. [PubMed: 9129948] 
340. Hill JW, Nemoto EM. Matrix-derived inflammatory mediator N-acetyl proline-glycine-proline is 
neurotoxic and upregulated in brain after ischemic stroke. J Neuroinflammation. 2015; 12:214. 
[PubMed: 26588897] 
341. Hill JH, Ward PA. The phlogistic role of C3 leukotactic fragments in myocardial infarcts of rats. J 
Exp Med. 1971; 133:885–900. [PubMed: 4993831] 
342. Hirsch J, Niemann CU, Hansen KC, Choi SJN, Su X, Frank JA, Fang X, Hirose R, Theodore P, 
Sapru A, Burlingame AL, Matthay MA. Alterations in the proteome of pulmonary alveolar type 
II cells in the rat after hepatic ishchemia-reperfusion. Crit Care Med. 2008; 36:1846–1854. 
[PubMed: 18496381] 
343. Hochhauser E, Cheporko Y, Yasovich N, Pinchas L, Offen D, Barhum Y, Pannet H, Tobar A, 
Vidne BA, Birk E. Bax deficiency reduces infarct size and improves long-term function after 
myocardial infarction. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2007; 47:11–20. [PubMed: 17406056] 
344. Hochhauser E, Kivity S, Offen D, Maulik N, Otani H, Barhum Y, Pannet H, Shneyvays V, 
Shainberg A, Goldshtaub V, Tobar A, Vidne BA. Bax ablation protects against myocardial 
ischemia-reperfusion injury in transgenic mice. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2003; 
284:H2351–H2359. [PubMed: 12742833] 
345. Hoda MN, Singh I, Singh AK, Khan M. Reduction of lipoxidative load by secretory 
phospholipase A2 inhibition protects against neurovascular injury following experimental stroke 
in rat. J Neuroinflammation. 2009; 6:21. [PubMed: 19678934] 
346. Hodgkinson CP, Bareja A, Gomez JA, Dzau VJ. Emerging concepts in paracrine mechanisms in 
regenerative cardiovascular medicine and biology. Circ Res. 2016; 118:95–107. [PubMed: 
26837742] 
347. Hofmann U, Frantz S. Role of lymphocytes in myocardial injury, healing, and remodeling after 
myocardial infarction. Circ Res. 2015; 116:354–367. [PubMed: 25593279] 
348. Hofmann U, Frantz S. Role of T-cells in myocardial infarction. Eur Heart J. 2015; 37:873–879. 
[PubMed: 26646702] 
349. Holler N, Zaru R, Micheau O, Thome M, Attinger A, Valitutti S, Bodmer JL, Schneider P, Seed 
B, Tschopp J. Fas triggers an alternative, caspase-8-independent cell death pathway using the 
kinase RIP as effector molecule. Nat Immunol. 2000; 1:489–95. [PubMed: 11101870] 
350. Holly TA, Drincic A, Byun Y, Nakamura S, Harris K, Klocke FJ, Cryns VL. Caspase inhibition 
reduces myocyte cell death induced by myocardial ischemia and reperfusion in vivo. J Mol Cell 
Cardiol. 1999; 31:1709–1715. [PubMed: 10471354] 
351. Horie Y, Ishii H. Liver dysfunction elicited by gut ischemia-reperfusion. Pathophysiology. 2001; 
8:11–20. [PubMed: 11476968] 
352. Horie Y, Wolf R, Russell J, Shanley TP, Granger DN. Role of Kupffer cells in gut ischemia/
reperfusion-induced hepatic microvascular dysfunction in mice. Hepatology. 1997; 26:1499–
1505. [PubMed: 9397990] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 73
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
353. Horstman LL, Jy W, Bidot CJ, Nordberg ML, Minagar A, Alexander JS, Kelley RE, Ahn YS. 
Potential roles of cell-derived microparticles in ischemic brain disease. Neurol Res. 2009; 
31:799–806. [PubMed: 19723448] 
354. Houlden A, Goldrick M, Brough D, Vizi ES, Lenart N, Martinecz B, Roberts IS, Denes A. Brain 
injury induces specific changes in the caecal microbiota of mice via altered autonomic activity 
and mucoprotein production. Brain Behav Immun. 2016; 57:10–20. [PubMed: 27060191] 
355. Howangyin KY, Silvestre JS. Diabetes mellitus and ischemic diseases: Molecular mechanisms of 
vascular repair dysfunction. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014; 34:1126–1135. [PubMed: 
24675660] 
356. Hu CJ, Chen SD, Yang DI, Lin TN, Chen CM, Huang TH, Hsu CY. Promoter region methylation 
and reduced expression of thrombospondin-1 after oxygen-glucose deprivation in murine cerebral 
endothelial cells. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2006; 26:1519–26. [PubMed: 16570076] 
357. Hu Y, Deng H, Xu S, Zhang J. MicroRNAs regulate mitochondrial function in cerebral ischemia-
reperfusion injury. Int J Mol Sci. 2015; 16:24895–24917. [PubMed: 26492239] 
358. Huang C, Andres AM, Ratliff EP, Hernandez G, Lee P, Gottlieb RA. Preconditioning involves 
selective mitophagy mediated by Parkin and p62/SQSTM1. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e20975. 
[PubMed: 21687634] 
359. Huang C, Liu W, Perry CN, Yitzhaki S, Lee Y, Yuan H, Tsukada YT, Hamacher-Brady A, 
Mentzer RM Jr, Gottlieb RA. Autophagy and protein kinase C are required for cardioprotection 
by sulfaphenazole. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2010; 298:H570–579. [PubMed: 20008275] 
360. Huang JQ, Radinovic S, Rezaiefar P, Black SC. In vivo myocardial infarct size reduction by a 
caspase inhibitor administered after the onset of ischemia. Eur J Pharmacol. 2000; 402:139–142. 
[PubMed: 10940367] 
360a. Huang Y, Rabb H, Womer KL. Ischemia-reperfusion and immediate T cell responses. Cell 
Immunol. 2007; 248:4–11. [PubMed: 17942086] 
361. Huang H, Tohme S, Al-Khafaji AB, Tai S, Loughran P, Chen L, Wang S, Kim J, Billiar T, Wang 
Y, Tsung A. Damage-associated molecular pattern-activated neutrophil extracellular trap 
exacerbates sterile inflammatory liver injury. Hepatology. 2015; 62:600–614. [PubMed: 
25855125] 
362. Hughes BG, Schulz R. Targeting MMP-2 to treat ischemic heart injury. Basic Res Cardiol. 2014; 
109:424. [PubMed: 24986221] 
363. Hullinger TG, Montgomery RL, Seto AG, Dickinson BA, Semus HM, Lynch JM, Dalby CM, 
Robinson K, Stack C, Latimer PA, Hare JM, Olson EN, van Rooij E. Inhibition of miR-15 
protects against cardiac ischemic injury. Circ Res. 2011; 110:71–81. [PubMed: 22052914] 
364. Hulsmans M, De Keyzer D, Holvoet P. MicroRNAs regulating oxidative stress and inflammation 
in relation to obesity and atherosclerosis. FASEB J. 2011; 25:2515–2527. [PubMed: 21507901] 
365. Humphreys MR, Castle EP, Lohse CM, Sebo TJ, Leslie KO, Andrews PE. Renal ischemia time in 
laparoscopic surgery: An experimental study in a porcine model. Int J Urol. 2009; 16:105–109. 
[PubMed: 19120531] 
366. Ikeda H, Suzuki Y, Suzuki M, Koike M, Tamura J, Tong J, Nomura M, Itoh G. Apoptosis is a 
major mode of cell death caused by ischaemia and ischaemia/reperfusion injury to the rat 
intestinal epithelium. Gut. 1998; 42:530–537. [PubMed: 9616316] 
367. Inagaki T, Akiyama T, Du CK, Zhan DY, Yoshimoto M, Shirai M. Monoamine oxidase-induced 
hydroxyl radical production and cardiomyocyte injury during myocardial ischemia-reperfusion in 
rats. Free Radic Res. 2016; 50:645–653. [PubMed: 26953687] 
368. Inagaki K, Chen L, Ikeno F, Lee FH, Imahashi K, Bouley DM, Rezaee M, Yock PG, Murphy E, 
Mochly-Rosen D. Inhibition of delta-protein kinase C protects against reperfusion injury of the 
ischemic heart in vivo. Circulation. 2003; 108:2304–2307. [PubMed: 14597593] 
369. Inagaki K, Churchill E, Mochly-Rosen D. Epsilon protein kinase C as a potential therapeutic 
target for the ischemic heart. Cardiovasc Res. 2006; 70:222–230. [PubMed: 16635641] 
370. Inderbitzen D, Beldi G, Avital I, Vinci G, Candinas D. Local and remote ischemia-reperfusion 
injury is mitigated in mice overexpressing human C1 inhibitor. Eur J Surg Res. 2004; 36a:142–
147.
Kalogeris et al.
Page 74
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
371. Report Brief. Institute of Medicine. Committee on Women’s Health Research, National 
Academies Press; Washington, DC: 2010. Women’s Health Research: Progress, Pitfalls, and 
Promise. 
372. Ioannou A, Dalle Lucca J, Tsokos GC. Immunopathogenesis of ischemia/reperfusion-associated 
tissue damage. Clin Immunol. 2011; 141:3–14. [PubMed: 21839685] 
373. Ivanov II, Frutos Rde L, Manel N, Yoshinaga K, Rifkin DB, Sartor RB, Finlay BB, Littman DR. 
Specific microbiota direct the differentiation of IL-17-producing T-helper cells in the mucosa of 
the small intestine. Cell Host Microbe. 2008; 4:337–349. [PubMed: 18854238] 
374. Jaeschke, H., Bautista, AP., Spolarics, Z., Farhood, A., Spitzer, JJ. Proceedings of the 5th 
International Congress on Oxygen Radicals. Elsevier Science Publishers; Amsterdam: 1993. 
Enhanced generation of superoxide by complement-stimulated Kupffer cells and priming of 
neutrophils during the initial reperfusion phase after hepatic ischemia. 
375. Jaeschke H, Bautista AP, Spolarics Z, Spitzer JJ. Superoxide generation by neutrophils and 
Kupffer cells during in vivo reperfusion after hepatic ischemia in rats. J Leukoc Biol. 1992; 
52:377–382. [PubMed: 1328439] 
376. Jaeschke H, Farhood A, Fisher MA, Smith CW. Sequestration of neutrophils in the hepatic 
vasculature during endotoxemia is independent of beta 2 integrins and intercellular adhesion 
molecule-1. Shock. 1996; 6:351–356. [PubMed: 8946651] 
377. Jaeschke H, Farhood A, Kupffer. Cell activation after no-flow ischemia versus hemorrhagic 
shock. Free Rad Biol Med. 2002; 33:210–219. [PubMed: 12106817] 
378. Jaeschke H, Farhood A, Smith CW. Neutrophils contribute to ischemia-reperfusion injury in rat 
liver in vivo. FASEB J. 1990; 4:3355–3359. [PubMed: 2253850] 
379. Jang HR, Gandolfo MT, Ko GJ, Satpute S, Racusen L, Rabb H. Early exposure to germs modifies 
kidney damage and inflammation after experimental ischemia-reperfusion injury. Am J Physiol 
Renal Physiol. 2009; 297:F1457–F1465. [PubMed: 19675178] 
379a. Jang HR, Rabb H. Immune cells in experimental acute kidney injury. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2015; 
11:88–101. [PubMed: 25331787] 
380. Jennings RB. Historical perspective on the pathology of myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury. 
Circ Res. 2013; 113:428–438. [PubMed: 23908330] 
381. Jennings RB, Reimer KA. The cell biology of acute myocardial ischemia. Annu Rev Med. 1991; 
42:225–246. [PubMed: 2035969] 
382. Jennings RB, Sommers HM, Smyth GA, Flack HA, Linn H. Myocardial necrosis induced by 
temporary occlusion of a coronary artery in the dog. Arch Pathol. 1960; 70:68–78. [PubMed: 
14407094] 
383. Jeremias I, Kupatt C, Martin-Villalba A, Habazettl H, Schenkel J, Boekstegers P, Debatin KM. 
Involvement of CD95/Apo1/Fas in cell death after myocardial ischemia. Circulation. 2000; 
102:915–920. [PubMed: 10952962] 
384. Jerome SN, Akimitsu T, Gute DC, Korthuis RJ. Ischemic preconditioning attenuates capillary no-
reflow induced by prolonged ischemia and reperfusion. Am J Physiol. 1995; 266:H1316–H1321.
385. Jerome SN, Akimitsu T, Korthuis RJ. Leukocyte adhesion, edema, and development of 
postischemic capillary no-reflow. Am J Physiol. 1994; 267:H1329–1336. [PubMed: 7943378] 
386. Jerome SN, Dore M, Paulson JC, Smith CW, Korthuis RJ. P-selectin and ICAM-1-dependent 
adherence reactions: Role in the genesis of postischemic no-reflow. Am J Physiol. 1994; 
266:H1316–H1321. [PubMed: 7514358] 
387. Jerome SN, Smith CW, Korthuis RJ. CD18-dependent adherence reactions play an important role 
in the development of the no-reflow phenomenon. Am J Physiol. 1993; 264:H479–483. 
[PubMed: 8095375] 
388. Jeyaseelan K, Lim KY, Armugam A. MicroRNA expression in the blood and brain of rats 
subjected to transient focal ischemia by middle cerebral artery occlusion. Stroke. 2008; 39:959–
966. [PubMed: 18258830] 
389. Ji X, Luo Y, Ling F, Stetler RA, Lan J, Cao G, Chen J. Mild hypothermia diminishes oxidative 
DNA damage and pro-death signaling events after cerebral ischemia: A mechanism for 
neuroprotection. Front Biosci. 2007; 12:1737–1747. [PubMed: 17127418] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 75
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
390. Jiang M, Liu K, Luo J, Dong Z. Autophagy is a renoprotective mechanism during in vitro hypoxia 
and in vivo ischemia-reperfusion injury. Am J Pathol. 2010; 176:1181–1192. [PubMed: 
20075199] 
390a. Jiang X, Ma H, Li C, Cao Y, Wang Y, Zhang Y, Liu Y. Effects of neonatal dexamethasone 
administration on cardiac recovery ability under ischemia-reperfusion in 24-wk-old rats. Pediatr 
Res. 2016; 80:128–135. [PubMed: 26991264] 
391. Jiang M, Zhang Y, Dusting GJ. NADPH oxidase-mediated redox signaling: Roles in cellular 
stress response, stress tolerance, and tissue repair. Pharmacol Rev. 2011; 63:218–242. [PubMed: 
21228261] 
392. Jin G, Arai K, Murata Y, Wang S, Stins MF, Lo EH, van Leyen K. Protecting against 
cerebrovascular injury: Contributions of 12/15-lipoxygenase to edema formation after transient 
focal ischemia. Stroke. 2008; 39:2538–2543. [PubMed: 18635843] 
393. Jin R, Yang G, Li G. Inflammatory mechanisms in ischemic stroke: Role of inflammatory cells. J 
Leukoc Biol. 2010; 87(5):779–789. [PubMed: 20130219] 
394. Jin Y, Silverman AJ, Vannucci SJ. Mast cell stabilization limits hypoxic-ischemic brain damage in 
the immature rat. Dev Neurosci. 2007; 9:373–384.
395. Jin Y, Silverman AJ, Vannucci SJ. Mast cells are early responders after hypoxia-ischemia in 
immature rat brain. Stroke. 2009; 40:3107–3112. [PubMed: 19520991] 
396. Johnston WH, Latta H. Glomerular mesangial and endothelial cell swelling following temporary 
renal ischemia and its role in the no-reflow phenomenon. Am J Pathol. 1977; 89:153–166. 
[PubMed: 333935] 
397. Jones AW, Durante W, Korthuis RJ. Heme oxygenase-1 deficiency leads to alteration of soluble 
guanylate cylcase redox regulation. J Pharmacol Exp Therap. 2010; 335:85–91. [PubMed: 
20605906] 
398. Jones DP, Sies H. The redox code. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2015; 23:734–746. [PubMed: 
25891126] 
399. Jones SP, Tang XL, Guo Y, Steenbergen C, Lefer DJ, Kukreja RC, Kong M, Li Q, Bhushan S, 
Zhu X, Du J, Nong Y, Stowers HL, Kondo K, Hunt GN, Goodchild TT, Orr A, Chang CC, 
Ockaili R, Salloum FN, Bolli R. The NHLBI-sponsored Consortium for preclinicAl assESsment 
of cARdioprotective therapies (CAESAR): A new paradigm for rigorous, accurate, and 
reproducible evaluation of putative infarct-sparing interventions in mice, rabbits, and pigs. Circ 
Res. 2015; 116:572–586. [PubMed: 25499773] 
400. Jong HR, Ko GJ, Wasowska BA, Rabb H. The interaction between ischemia-reperfusion and 
immune responses in the kidney. J Mol Med. 2009; 87:859–864. [PubMed: 19562316] 
401. Julia PL, Kofsky ER, Buckberg GD, Young HH, Bugyi HI. Studies of myocardial protection in 
the immature heart. I. Enhanced tolerance of immature versus adult myocardium to global 
ischemia with reference to metabolic differences. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1990; 100:879–887. 
[PubMed: 2246910] 
402. Kahle KT, Simard JM, Staley KJ, Nahed BV, Jones PS, Sun D. Molecular mechanisms of 
ischemic cerebral edema: Role of electroneutral ion transport. Physiology (Bethesda). 2009; 
24:257–265. [PubMed: 19675357] 
403. Kaiser RA, Bueno OF, Lips DJ, Doevendans PA, Jones F, Kimball TF, Molkentin JD. Targeted 
inhibition of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase antagonizes cardiac injury and cell death 
following ischemia-reperfusion in vivo. J Biol Chem. 2004; 279:15524–15530. [PubMed: 
14749328] 
404. Kaiser RA, Liang Q, Bueno O, Huang Y, Lackey T, Klevitsky R, Hewett TE, Molkentin JD. 
Genetic inhibition or activation of JNK1/2 protects the myocardium from ischemia-reperfusion-
induced cell death in vivo. J Biol Chem. 2005; 280:32602–32608. [PubMed: 16043490] 
405. Kalogeris T, Baines C, Krenz M, Korthuis RJ. Cell biology of ischemia/reperfusion injury. Int 
Rev Cell Mol Biol. 2012; 298:229–318. [PubMed: 22878108] 
406. Kalogeris TJ, Bao Y, Korthuis RJ. Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species: A double-edged sword 
in ischemia/reperfusion versus preconditioning. Redox Biol. 2014; 2:702–714. [PubMed: 
24944913] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 76
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
407. Kaludercic N, Carpi A, Menabo R, Di Lisa F, Paolocci N. Monoamine oxidases (MAO) in the 
pathogenesis of heart failure and ischemia/reperfusion injury. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011; 
1813:1323–1332. [PubMed: 20869994] 
408. Kaludercic N, Mialet-Perez J, Paolocci N, Parini A, Di Lisa F. Monoamine oxidases as sources of 
oxidants in the heart. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2014; 73:34–42. [PubMed: 24412580] 
409. Kaludercic N, Takimoto E, Nagayama T, Lai E, Chen K, Shih JC, Pacak K, Kass DA, Di Lisa F, 
Paolocci N. Lack of monoamine oxidase A and B activity prevents heart failure in pressure-
overloaded mice. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2010; 48:S13.
410. Karp, CL. Links between innate and adaptive immunity. In: Serhan, CN.Ward, PA., Gilroy, DW., 
editors. Fundamentals of Inflammation. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press; 2010. p. 
28-37.
411. Karra L, Berent-Maoz B, Ben-Zaimra M, Levi-Schaffer F. Are we ready to downregulate mast 
cells? Curr Opin Immunol. 2009; 21:708–714. [PubMed: 19837574] 
412. Kassahun WT, Schulz T, Richter O, Hauss J. Unchanged high mortality rates from acute occlusive 
intestinal ischemia: Six year review. Langenbecks Arch Surg. 2008; 393:163–171. [PubMed: 
18172675] 
413. Kelton JG, Warkentin TE, Hayward CP, Murphy WG, Moore JC. Calpain activity in patients with 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura is associated with platelet microparticles. Blood. 1992; 
80:2246–2251. [PubMed: 1421394] 
414. Kemp M, Go YM, Jones DP. Nonequilibrium thermodynamics of thiol/disulfide redox systems: A 
perspective on redox systems biology. Free Radic Biol Med. 2008; 44:921–937. [PubMed: 
18155672] 
415. Khalil PN, Neuhof C, Huss R, Pollhammer M, Khalil MN, Neuhof H, Fritz H, Siebeck M. 
Calpain inhibition reduces infarct size and improves global hemodynamics and left ventricular 
contractility in a porcine myocardial ischemia/reperfusion model. Eur J Pharmacol. 2005; 
528:124–131. [PubMed: 16324693] 
416. Khandoga A, Biberthaler P, Enders G, Axmann S, Hatter J, Messmer K, Krombach F. Platelet 
adhesion mediated by fibrinogen-intercellular adhesion molecule-1 binding induces tissue injury 
in the postischemic liver in vivo. Tansplantation. 2002; 74:681–688.
417. Khandoga A, Hanschen M, Kessler JS, Kronbach F. CD4+ T cells contribute to postischemic liver 
injury in mice by interacting with sinusoidal endothelium and platelets. Hepatology. 2006; 
43:306–315. [PubMed: 16440342] 
418. Kim HJ, Rowe M, Ren M, Hong JS, Chen PS, Chuang DM. Histone deacetylase inhibitors exhibit 
anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects in a rat permanent ischemic model of stroke: 
Multiple mechanisms of action. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2007; 321:892–901. [PubMed: 
17371805] 
419. Kim J, Kim DS, Park MJ, Cho HJ, Zervos AS, Bonventre JV, Park KM. Omi/HtrA2 protease is 
associated with tubular cell apoptosis and fibrosis induced by unilateral ureteral obstruction. Am 
J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2010; 298:F1332–F1340. [PubMed: 20219823] 
420. Kim JJ, Lee SB, Park JK, Yoo YD. TNF-alpha-induced ROS production triggering apoptosis is 
directly linked to Romo1 and Bcl-X(L). Cell Death Differ. 2010; 17:1420–1434. [PubMed: 
20203691] 
420a. Kim MG, Boo CS, Ko YS, Lee HY, Cho WY, Kim HK, Jo SK. Depletion of kidney CD11c+ 
F4/80+ cells impairs the recovery process in ischaemia/reperfusion-induced acute kidney injury. 
Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2010; 25:2908–2921. [PubMed: 20388633] 
421. King LA, Toledo AH, Rivera-Chavez FA, Toledo-Pereyra LH. Role of p38 and JNK in liver 
ischemia and reperfusion. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg. 2009; 16:763–770. [PubMed: 
19680593] 
422. Kinross JM, Darzi AW, Nicholson JK. Gut microbiome-host interactions in health and disease. 
Genome Med. 2011; 3:14. [PubMed: 21392406] 
423. Kinross J, Warren O, Basson S, Holmes E, Silk D, Darzi A, Nicholson JK. Intestinal ischemia/
reperfusion injury: Defining the role of the gut microbiome. Biomark Med. 2009; 3:175–192. 
[PubMed: 20477509] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 77
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
424. Kinsey GR, Huang L, Vergis AL, Li L, Okusa MD. Regulatory T cells contribute to the protective 
effect of ischemic preconditioning in the kidney. Kidney Int. 2010; 77:771–780. [PubMed: 
20164824] 
425. Kinsey GR, Sharma R, Huang L, Li L, Vergis AL, Ye H, Ju ST, Okusa MD. Regulatory T cells 
suppress innate immunity in kidney ischemia-reperfusion injury. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009; 
20:1744–1753. [PubMed: 19497969] 
426. Kiray M, Bagriyanik HA, Pekcetin C, Ergur BU, Uysal N. Protective effects of deprenyl in 
transient cerebral ischemia in rats. Chin J Physiol. 2008; 51:275–281. [PubMed: 19175183] 
427. Kloner RA. Current state of clinical translation of cardioprotective agents for acute myocardial 
infarction. Circ Res. 2013; 113:451–463. [PubMed: 23908332] 
428. Kloner RA, Ganote CE, Jennings RB. The “no-reflow” phenomenon after temporary coronary 
occlusion in the dog. J Clin Invest. 1974; 54:1496–1508. [PubMed: 4140198] 
429. Klotz L, Norman S, Vieira JM, Masters M, Rohling M, Dube KN, Bollini S, Matsuzaki F, Carr 
CA, Riley PR. Cardiac lymphatics are heterogeneous in origin and respond to injury. Nature. 
2015; 522:62–67. [PubMed: 25992544] 
430. Kobayashi A, Imamura H, Isobe M, Matsuyama Y, Soeda J, Matsunaga K, Kawasaki S. Mac-1 
(CD11b/CD18) and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 in ischemia-reperfusion injury of rat liver. 
Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2001; 281:G577–585. [PubMed: 11447039] 
431. Kobayashi M, Takeyoshi I, Yoshinari D, Matsumoto K, Morishita Y. P38 mitogen-activated 
protein kinase inhibition attenuates ischemia-reperfusion injury of the rat liver. Surgery. 2002; 
131:344–349. [PubMed: 11894041] 
432. Kobayasi T, Hirano K, Yamamoto T, Hasegawa G, Hatakeyama K, Suematsu M, Naito M. The 
protective role of Kupffer cells in the ischemia-reperfused rat liver. Arch Histol Cytol. 2002; 
65:251–261. [PubMed: 12389664] 
433. Koboziev I, Reinoso Webb C, Furr KL, Grisham MB. Role of the enteric microbiota in intestinal 
homeostasis and inflammation. Free Radic Biol Med. 2014; 68:122–133. [PubMed: 24275541] 
434. Koeth RA, Wang Z, Levison BS, Buffa JA, Org E, Sheehy BT, Britt EB, Fu X, Wu Y, Li L, Smith 
JD, DiDonato JA, Chen J, Li H, Wu GD, Lewis JD, Warrier M, Brown JM, Krauss RM, Tang 
WH, Bushman FD, Lusis AJ, Hazen SL. Intestinal microbiota metabolism of L-carnitine, a 
nutrient in red meat, promotes atherosclerosis. Nat Med. 2013; 19:576–585. [PubMed: 
23563705] 
435. Kohda Y, Gemba M. Cephaloridine induces translocation of protein kinase C d into mitochondria 
and enhances mitochondrial generation of free radicals in the kidney cortex of rats causing renal 
dysfunction. J Pharmacol Sci. 2005; 98:49–57. [PubMed: 15879677] 
436. Kohli V, Madden JF, Bentley RC, Clavien PA. Calpain mediates ischemic injury of the liver 
through modulation of apoptosis and necrosis. Gastroenterology. 1999; 116:168–78. [PubMed: 
9869615] 
437. Kokura S, Wolf RE, Yoshikawa T, Granger DN, Aw TY. Molecular mechanisms of neutrophil-
endothelial cell adhesion induced by redox imbalance. Circ Res. 1999; 84:516–524. [PubMed: 
10082473] 
438. Kokura S, Wolf RE, Yoshikawa T, Ichikawa H, Granger DN, Aw TY. Endothelial cells exposed to 
anoxia/reoxygenation are hyperadhesive to T-lymphocytes: Kinetics and molecular mechanisms. 
Microcirculation. 2000; 7:13–23. [PubMed: 10708334] 
439. Kolettis TM, Barton M, Langleben D, Matsumura Y. Endothelin in coronary artery disease and 
myocardial infarction. Cardiol Rev. 2013; 21:249–256. [PubMed: 23422018] 
440. Koleva PT, Kim JS, Scott JA, Kozyrskyj AL. Microbial programming of health and disease starts 
during fetal life. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today Rev. 2015; 105:265–277.
441. Kondo T, Reaume AG, Huang TT, Carlson E, Murakami K, Chen SF, Hoffman EK, Scott RW, 
Epstein CJ, Chan PH. Reduction of CuZn-superoxide dismutase activity exacerbates neuronal 
cell injury and edema formation after transient focal cerebral ischemia. J Neurosci. 1997; 
17:4180–4189. [PubMed: 9151735] 
442. Konstantinidis K, Whelan RS, Kitsis RN. Mechanisms of cell death in heart disease. Arterioscler 
Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012; 32:1552–1562. [PubMed: 22596221] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 78
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
443. Koponen S, Goldsteins G, Keinänen R, Koistinaho J. Induction of protein kinase Cd subspecies in 
neurons and microglia after transient global brain ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2000; 
20:93–102. [PubMed: 10616797] 
444. Korichneva I. Redox regulation of cardiac protein kinase C. Exp Clin Cardiol. 2005; 10:256–261. 
[PubMed: 19641676] 
445. Kornfeld OS, Hwang S, Disatnik MH, Chen CH, Qvit N, Mochly-Rosen D. Mitochondrial 
reactive oxygen species at the heart of the matter: New therapeutic approaches for cardiovascular 
diseases. Circ Res. 2015; 116:1783–1799. [PubMed: 25999419] 
446. Korthuis RJ, Anderson DC, Granger DN. Role of neutrophil-endothelial cell adhesion in 
inflammatory disorders. J Crit Care. 1994; 9:47–71. [PubMed: 8199653] 
447. Korzick DH, Kostyak JC, Hunter JC, Saupe KW. Local delivery of PKCepsilon-activating peptide 
mimics ischemic preconditioning in aged hearts through GSK-3beta but not F1-ATPase 
inactivation. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2007; 293:H2056–2063. [PubMed: 17675573] 
448. Kosieradzki M, Rowiński W. Ischemia/reperfusion injury in kidney transplantation: Mechanisms 
and prevention. Transplant Proc. 2008; 40:3279–3288. [PubMed: 19100373] 
449. Krenz, M., Baines, C., Kalogeris, T., Korthuis, RJ. Cell Survival Programs and Ischemia/
Reperfusion: Hormesis, Preconditioning, and Cardiovascular Protection. In: Granger, DN., 
Granger, JP., editors. Integrated Systems Physiology: Molecules to Function eBook series. 
Morgan-Claypool: 2013. 
450. Krenz M, Korthuis RJ. Moderate ethanol ingestion and cardiovascular protection: From 
epidemiologic associations to cellular mechanisms. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2012; 52:93–104. 
[PubMed: 22041278] 
451. Kristián T. Metabolic stages, mitochondria and calcium in hypoxic/ischemic brain damage. Cell 
Calcium. 2004; 36:221–233. [PubMed: 15261478] 
452. Kristiansen M, Graverson JH, Jacobsen C, Sonne O, Hoffman HJ, Law SK, Moestrup SK. 
Identification of the haemoglobin scavenger receptor. Nature. 2001; 409:198–201. [PubMed: 
11196644] 
453. Kroemer G, Galluzzi L, Brenner C. Mitochondrial membrane permeabilization in cell death. 
Physiol Rev. 2007; 87:99–163. [PubMed: 17237344] 
454. Kroemer G, Galluzzi L, Vandenabeele P, Abrams J, Alnemri ES, Baehrecke EH, Blagosklonny 
MV, El-Deiry WS, Golstein P, Green DR, Hengartner M, Knight RA, Kumar S, Lipton SA, 
Malorni W, Nuñez G, Peter ME, Tschopp J, Yuan J, Piacentini M, Zhivotovsky B, Melino G. 
Classification of cell death: Recommendations of the Nomenclature Committee on Cell Death. 
Cell Death Differ. 2009; 16:3–11. [PubMed: 18846107] 
455. Krutzfeldt J, Rajewsky N, Braich R, Rajeev KG, Tuschl T, Manoharan M, Stoffel M. Silencing of 
microRNAs in vivo with ‘antagomirs’. Nature. 2005; 438:685–689. [PubMed: 16258535] 
456. Kuan CY, Whitmarsh AJ, Yang DD, Liao G, Schloemer AJ, Dong C, Bao J, Banasiak KJ, Haddad 
GG, Flavell RA, Davis RJ, Rakic P. A critical role of neural-specific JNK3 for ischemic 
apoptosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003; 100:15184–15189. [PubMed: 14657393] 
457. Kubli DA, Gustafsson AB. Mitochondria and mitophagy: The yin and yang of cell death control. 
Circ Res. 2012; 111:1208–1221. [PubMed: 23065344] 
458. Kuboki S, Sakai N, Tschöp J, Edwards MJ, Lentsch AB, Caldwell CC. Distinct contributions of 
CD4+ T cell subsets in hepatic ischemia/reperfusion injury. Am J Physiol. 2009; 296:G1054–
G1059.
459. Kukreja RC, Yin C, Salloum FN. MicroRNAs: New players in cardiac injury and protection. Mol 
Pharmacol. 2011; 80:558–564. [PubMed: 21737570] 
460. Kumar P, Shen Q, Pivetti CD, Lee ES, Wu MH, Yuan SY. Molecular mechanisms of endothelial 
hyperpermeability: Implications in inflammation. Expert Rev Mol Med. 2009; 11:e19. [PubMed: 
19563700] 
461. Kume M, Yamamoto Y, Saad S, Gomi T, Kimoto S, Shimabukuro T, Yagi T, Nakagami M, Takada 
Y, Morimoto T, Yamaoka Y. Ischemic preconditioning of the liver in rats: Implications of heat 
shock protein induction to increase tolerance of ischemia-reperfusion injury. J Lab Clin Med. 
1996; 128:251–258. [PubMed: 8783632] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 79
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
462. Kuppusamy P, Zweier JL. Cardiac applications of EPR imaging. NMR Biomed. 2004; 17:226–
239. [PubMed: 15366025] 
463. Kvietys PR, Granger DN. Role of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species in the vascular responses 
to inflammation. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012; 52:556–592. [PubMed: 22154653] 
464. Lagranha CJ, Deschamps A, Aponte A, Steenbergen C, Murphy E. Sex differences in the 
phosphorylation of mitochondrial proteins result in reduced production of reactive oxygen 
species and cardioprotection in females. Circ Res. 2010; 106:1681–1691. [PubMed: 20413785] 
465. Lam FW, Burns AR, Smith CW, Rumbaut RE. Platelets enhance neutrophil transendothelial 
migration via P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2011; 
300:H468–H475. [PubMed: 21169400] 
466. Lam V, Su J, Koprowski S, Hsu A, Tweddell JS, Rafiee P, Gross GJ, Salzman NH, Baker JE. 
Intestinal microbiota determine severity of myocardial infarction in rats. FASEB J. 2012; 
26:1727–1735. [PubMed: 22247331] 
466a. Lam FW, Vijayan KV, Rumbaut RE. Platelets and their interactions with other immune cells. 
Compr Physiol. 2015; 5:1265–1280. [PubMed: 26140718] 
467. Langley-Evans SC. Hypertension induced by foetal exposure to a maternal low-protein diet, in the 
rat, is prevented by pharmacological blockade of maternal glucocorticoid synthesis. J Hypertens. 
1997; 15:537–544. [PubMed: 9170007] 
468. Langley-Evans SC, McMullen S. Developmental origins of adult disease. Med Princ Pract. 2010; 
19:87–98. [PubMed: 20134170] 
469. Lappas CM, Day YJ, Marshall MA, Engelhardt VH, Linden J. Adenosine A2A receptor activation 
reduces hepatic ischemia reperfusion injury by inhibiting CD1d-dependent NKT activation. J Exp 
Med. 2006; 203:2639–2648. [PubMed: 17088433] 
470. Lassègue B, Clempus RE. Vascular NAD(P)H oxidases: Specific features, expression, and 
regulation. Am J Physiol. 2003; 285:R277–R297.
471. LATE_Study_Group. Late Assessment of Thrombolytic Efficacy (LATE) study with alteplase 6–
24 hours after onset of acute myocardial infarction. Lancet. 1993; 342:759–66. [PubMed: 
8103874] 
472. Lazarus B, Messina A, Barker JE, Hurley JV, Romeo R, Morrison WA, Knight KR. The role of 
mast cells in schaemia-reperfusion injury in murine skeletal muscle. J Pathol. 2000; 191:443–
448. [PubMed: 10918220] 
473. Le DA, Wu Y, Huang Z, Matsushita K, Plesnila N, Augustinack JC, Hyman BT, Yuan J, Kuida K, 
Flavell RA, Moskowitz MA. Caspase activation and neuroprotection in caspase-3-deficientmice 
after in vivo cerebral ischemia and in vitro oxygen glucose deprivation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A. 2002; 99:15188–15193. [PubMed: 12415117] 
474. Lecour S, Botker HE, Condorelli G, Davidson SM, Garcia-Dorado D, Engel FB, Ferdinandy P, 
Heusch G, Madonna R, Ovize M, Ruiz-Meana M, Schulz R, Sluijter JP, Van Laake LW, Yellon 
DM, Hausenloy DJ. ESC working group cellular biology of the heart: Position paper: Improving 
the preclinical assessment of novel cardioprotective therapies. Cardiovasc Res. 2014; 104:399–
411. [PubMed: 25344369] 
475. Lee H, Green D, Lai L, Hou YJ, Jensenius JC, Liu D, Cheong C, Park CG, Zhang M. Early 
complement factors in the local tissue immunocomplex generated during intestinal ischemia/
reperfusion injury. Mol Immunol. 2010; 47:972–981. [PubMed: 20004473] 
476. Lee HA, Hong SH, Kim JW, Jang IS. Possible involvement of DNA methylation in NKCC1 gene 
expression during postnatal development and in response to ischemia. J Neurochem. 2010; 
114:520–9. [PubMed: 20456012] 
477. Lee H-L, Chen C-L, Yeh ST, Zweier JL, Chen Y-R. Biphasic modulation of the mitochondrial 
electron transport chain in myocardial ischemia and reperfusion. Am J Physiol. 2012; 
302:H1410–H1422.
478. Lee JM, Grabb MC, Zipfel GJ, Choi DW. Brain tissue responses to ischemia. J Clin Invest. 2000; 
106:723–731. [PubMed: 10995780] 
479. Lee KH, Kim SE, Lee YS. SP600125, a selective JNK inhibitor, aggravates hepatic ischemia-
reperfusion injury. Exp Mol Med. 2006; 38:408–16. [PubMed: 16953120] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 80
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
480. Lee P, Sata M, Lefer DJ, Factor SM, Walsh K, Kitsis RN. Fas pathway is a critical mediator of 
cardiac myocyte death and MI during ischemia-reperfusion in vivo. Am J Physiol Heart Circ 
Physiol. 2003; 284:H456–H463. [PubMed: 12414449] 
481. Lee MC, Velayutham M, Komatsu T, Hille R, Zweier JL. Measurement and characterization of 
superoxide generation from xanthine dehydrogenase: A redox-regulated pathway of radical 
generation in ischemic tissues. Biochemistry. 2014; 53:6615–6623. [PubMed: 25243829] 
482. Lefer DJ. Do neutrophils contribute to myocardial reperfusion injury? Basic Res Cardiol. 2002; 
97:263–267. [PubMed: 12212545] 
483. Lei K, Davis RJ. JNK phosphorylation of Bim-related members of the Bcl2 family induces Bax-
dependent apoptosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003; 100:2432–7. [PubMed: 12591950] 
484. Lejay A, Fang F, John R, Van JA, Barr M, Thaveau F, Chakfe N, Geny B, Scholey JW. Ischemia 
reperfusion injury, ischemic conditioning and diabetes mellitus. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2016; 91:11–
22. [PubMed: 26718721] 
485. Lemay S, Rabb H, Postler G, Singh AK. Prominent and sustained up-regulation of gp130-
signaling cytokines and the chemokine MIP-2 in murine renal ischemia-reperfusion injury. 
Transplant. 2000; 69:959–963.
486. Lerchenberger M, Uhl B, Stark K, Zuchtriegel G, Eckart A, Miller M, Puhr-Westerheide D, 
Praetner M, Rehberg M, Khandoga AG, Lauber K, Massberg S, Krombach F, Reichel CA. Matrix 
metalloproteinases modulate ameboid-like migration of neutrophils through inflamed interstitial 
tissue. Blood. 2013; 122:770–780. [PubMed: 23757732] 
487. Leroyer AS, Anfosso F, Lacroix R, Sabatier F, Simoncini S, Njock SM, Jourde N, Brunet P, 
Camoin-Jau L, Sampol J, Dignat-George F. Endothelial-derived microparticles: Biological 
conveyors at the crossroad of inflammation, thrombosis and angiogenesis. Thromb Haemost. 
2010; 104:456–463. [PubMed: 20664896] 
488. Lesnefsky EJ, Chen Q, Moghaddas S, Hassan MO, Tandler B, Hoppel CL. Blockade of electron 
transport during ischemia protects cardiac mitochondria. J Biol Chem. 2004; 279:47961–47967. 
[PubMed: 15347666] 
489. Levine B, Kroemer G. Autophagy in the pathogenesis of disease. Cell. 2008; 132:27–42. 
[PubMed: 18191218] 
490. Levonen AL, Dickinson DA, Moellering DR, Mulcahy RT, Forman HJ, Darley-Usmar VM. 
Biphasic effects of 15-deoxy-delta (12,14)-prostaglandin J(2) on glutathione induction and 
apoptosis in human endothelial cells. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2001; 21:1846–1851. 
[PubMed: 11701476] 
491. Lewen A, Matz P, Chan PH. Free radical pathways in CNS injury. J Neurotrauma. 2000; 17:871–
890. [PubMed: 11063054] 
491a. Li G, Xiao Y, Estrella JL, Ducsay CA, Gilbert RD, Zhang L. Effect of fetal hypoxia on heart 
susceptibility to ischemia and reperfusion injury in the adult rat. J Soc Gynecol Investig. 2003; 
10:265–274.
491b. Li G, Bae S, Zhang L. Effect of prenatal hypoxia on heat stress-mediated cardioprotection in 
adult rat heart. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2004; 286:H1712–H1719. [PubMed: 14715507] 
492. Li J, Xu J, Cheng Y, Wang F, Song Y, Xiao J. Circulating microRNAs as mirrors of acute 
coronary syndromes: MiRacle or quagMire? J Cell Mol Med. 2013; 17:1363–1370. [PubMed: 
24188699] 
493. Li JY, Gu X, Zhang WH, Jia S, Zhou Y. GdCl3 abates hepatic ischemia-reperfusion injury by 
inhibiting apoptosis in rats. Hepatobil Panceat Dis Int. 2009; 8:518–523.
494. Li R, Ding T, Liu X, Li C. Influence of SB203580 on cell apoptosis and P38MAPK in renal 
ischemia/reperfusion injury. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2006; 26:50–52. 
[PubMed: 16711007] 
495. Liao L, Harris NR, Granger DN. Oxidized low-density lipoproteins and microvascular responses 
to ischemia-reperfusion. Am J Physiol. 1996; 271:H2508–H2514. [PubMed: 8997311] 
496. Liesz A, Dalpke A, Mracsko E, Antoine DJ, Roth S, Zhou W, Yang H, Na SY, Akhisaroglu M, 
Fleming T, Eigenbrod T, Nawroth PP, Tracey KJ, Veltkamp R. DAMP signaling is a key pathway 
inducing immune modulation after brain injury. J Neuroscience. 2015; 35:583–598. [PubMed: 
25589753] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 81
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
497. Liesz AL, Suri-Payer E, Veltkamp C, Doerr H, Sommer C, Rivest S, Giese T, Veltkamp R. 
Regulatory T cells are key cerebroprotective immunomodulators in acute experimental stroke. 
Nature Med. 2009; 15:192–199. [PubMed: 19169263] 
498. Lima B, Forrester MT, Hess DT, Stamler JS. S-nitrosylation in cardiovascular signaling. Circ Res. 
2010; 106:633–646. [PubMed: 20203313] 
499. Lindemann S, Klingel B, Fisch A, Meyer J, Darius H. Increased platelet sensitivity toward 
platelet inhibitors during physical exercise in patients with coronary artery disease. Thromb Res. 
1999; 93:51–59. [PubMed: 9950258] 
500. Lindsay T, Romaschin A, Walker PM. Free radical mediated damage in skeletal muscle. 
Microcirc Endothelium Lymphatics. 1989; 5:157–170. [PubMed: 2700374] 
501. Lindsey ML, Mayr M, Gomes AV, Delles C, Arrell DK, Murphy AM, Lange RA, Costello CE, Jin 
YF, Laskowitz DT, Sam F, Terzic A, Van Eyk J, Srinivas PR. Transformative impact of 
proteomics on cardiovascular health and disease: A scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2015; 132:852–872. [PubMed: 26195497] 
502. Linfert D, Austen WG Jr, Rabb H. Lymphocytes and ischemia-reperfusion injury. Transplant Rev. 
2009; 23:1–10.
503. Linkermann A, Brasen JH, Darding M, Jin MK, Sanz AB, Heller JO, De Zen F, Weinlich R, Ortiz 
A, Walczak H, Weinberg JM, Green DR, Kunzendorf U, Krautwald S. Two independent 
pathways of regulated necrosis mediate ischemia-reperfusion injury. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2013; 110:12024–12029. [PubMed: 23818611] 
504. Linkermann A, Brasen JH, Himmerkus N, Liu S, Huber TB, Kunzendorf U, Krautwald S. Rip1 
(receptor-interacting protein kinase 1) mediates necroptosis and contributes to renal ischemia/
reperfusion injury. Kidney Int. 2012; 81:751–761. [PubMed: 22237751] 
505. Linkermann A, De Zen F, Weinberg J, Kunzendorf U, Krautwald S. Programmed necrosis in 
acute kidney injury. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2012; 27:3412–3419. [PubMed: 22942173] 
506. Linkermann A, Hackl MJ, Kunzendorf U, Walczak H, Krautwald S, Jevnikar AM. Necroptosis in 
immunity and ischemia-reperfusion injury. Am J Transplant. 2013; 13:2797–2804. [PubMed: 
24103029] 
507. Linkermann A, Heller JO, Prokai A, Weinberg JM, De Zen F, Himmerkus N, Szabo AJ, Brasen 
JH, Kunzendorf U, Krautwald S. The RIP1-kinase inhibitor necrostatin-1 prevents osmotic 
nephrosis and contrast-induced AKI in mice. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013; 24:1545–1557. [PubMed: 
23833261] 
508. Linkermann A, Skouta R, Himmerkus N, Mulay SR, Dewitz C, De Zen F, Prokai A, Zuchtriegel 
G, Krombach F, Welz PS, Green DR. Necroptosis. N Engl J Med. 370:455–465. [PubMed: 
24476434] 
509. Lira VA, Brown DL, Lira AK, Kavazis AN, Soltow QA, Zeanah EH, Criswell DS. Nitric oxide 
and AMPK cooperatively regulate PGC-1 in skeletal muscle cells. J Physiol. 2010; 588:3551–
3566. [PubMed: 20643772] 
510. Liu D, Gan X, Huang P, Chen X, Ge M, Hei Z. Inhibiting tryptase after ischemia limits small 
intestinal ischemia-reperfusion injury through protease-activated receptor 2 in rats. J Trauma 
Acute Care Surg. 2012; 73:1138–1144. [PubMed: 22976423] 
511. Liu L, Kubes P. Molecular mechanisms of leukocyte recruitment: Organ-specific mechanisms of 
action. Thromb Haemost. 2003; 89:213–220. [PubMed: 12574798] 
512. Liu M, Chien CC, Grigoryev DN, Gandalfo MT, Colvin RB, Rabb H. Effect of T cells on vascular 
permeability in early ischemic acute kidney injury in mice. Microvasc Res. 2009; 77:340–347. 
[PubMed: 19323971] 
513. Liu P, McGuire PM, Fisher MA, Farhood A, Smith CW, Jaeschke H. Activation of Kupffer cells 
and neutrophils for reactive oxygen formation is responsible for endotoxin-enhanced liver injury 
after hepatic ischemia. Shock. 1995; 3:56–62. [PubMed: 7850581] 
514. Liu XH, Zhang ZY, Sun S, Wu XD. Ischemic postconditioning protects myocardium from 
ischemia/reperfusion injury through attenuating endoplasmic reticulum stress. Shock. 2008; 
30:422–427. [PubMed: 18323739] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 82
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
515. Liu Y, Kato H, Nakata N, Kogure K. Protection of rat hippocampus against ischemic neuronal 
damage by pretreatment with sublethal ischemia. Brain Res. 1992; 586:121–124. [PubMed: 
1380876] 
516. Loi P, Paular F, Pajak B, Nagy N, Salmon I, Moser M, Goldman M, Flamand V. The fate of 
dendritic cells in a mouse model of liver ischemia/reperfusion injury. Transplant Proc. 2004; 
36:1275–1279. [PubMed: 15251311] 
517. Lorenzen JM. Vascular and circulating microRNAs in renal ischaemia-reperfusion injury. J 
Physiol. 2015; 593:1777–1784. [PubMed: 25691473] 
518. Lu X, Kwong JQ, Molkentin JD, Bers DM. Individual Cardiac Mitochondria Undergo Rare 
Transient Permeability Transition Pore Openings. Circ Res. 2016; 118:834–841. [PubMed: 
26712344] 
519. Lu YY, Li ZZ, Jiang DS, Wang L, Zhang Y, Chen K, Zhang XF, Liu Y, Fan GC, Chen Y, Yang Q, 
Zhou Y, Zhang XD, Liu DP, Li H. TRAF1 is a critical regulator of cerebral ischaemia-reperfusion 
injury and neuronal death. Nat Commun. 2013; 4:2852. [PubMed: 24284943] 
520. Lu X, Li N, Shushakova N, Schmitt R, Menne J, Susnik N, Meier M, Leitges M, Haller H, Gueler 
F, Rong S. C57BL/6 and 129/Sv mice: Genetic difference to renal ischemia-reperfusion. J 
Nephrol. 2012; 25:738–743. [PubMed: 22180224] 
521. Lu X, Li N, Shushakova N, Schmitt R, Menne J, Susnik N, Meier M, Leitges M, Haller H, Gueler 
F, Rong S, LueddeLuedde M, Lutz M, Carter N, Sosna J, Jacoby C, Vucur M, Gautheron J, 
Roderburg C, Borg N, Reisinger F, Hippe HJ, Linkermann A, Wolf MJ, Rose-John S, Lullmann-
Rauch R, Adam D, Flogel U, Heikenwalder M, Luedde T, Frey N. RIP3, a kinase promoting 
necroptotic cell death, mediates adverse remodelling after myocardial infarction. Cardiovasc Res. 
2014; 103:206–216. [PubMed: 24920296] 
522. Lucchesi BR, Kilgore KS. Complement inhibitors in myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury. 
Immunopharmacology. 1997; 38:27–42. [PubMed: 9476112] 
523. Ma M. Role of calpains in the injury-induced dysfunction and degeneration of the mammalian 
axon. Neurobiol Dis. 2013; 60:61–79. [PubMed: 23969238] 
524. Ma X, Becker Buscaglia LE, Barker JR, Li Y. MicroRNAs in NF-kappaB signaling. J Mol Cell 
Biol. 2011; 3:159–166. [PubMed: 21502305] 
524a. Ma Y, Wang J, Wang Y, Yang GY. The biphasic function of microglia in ischemic stroke. Prog 
Neurobiol. 2016 pii: S0301-0082(15)30070-8. [Epub ahead of print]. 
525. Maclean D, Fishbein MC, Braunwald E, Maroko PR. Long-term preservation of ischemic 
myocardium after experimental coronary artery occlusion. J Clin Invest. 1978; 61:541–551. 
[PubMed: 641137] 
526. Maekawa A, Lee JK, Nagaya T, Kamiya K, Yasui K, Horiba M, Miwa K, Uzzaman M, Maki M, 
Ueda Y, Kodama I. Overexpression of calpastatin by gene transfer prevents troponin I 
degradation and ameliorates contractile dysfunction in rat hearts subjected to ischemia/
reperfusion. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2003; 35:1277–84. [PubMed: 14519437] 
527. Maggi CA. The effects of tachykinin on inflammatory and immune cells. Regul Petides. 1997; 
70:75–90.
528. Mao XR, Crowder CM. Protein misfolding induces hypoxic preconditioning via a subset of the 
unfolded protein response machinery. Mol Cell Biol. 2010; 30:5033–5042. [PubMed: 20733002] 
529. Mariappan N, Soorappan RN, Haque M, Sriramula S, Francis J. TNF-α-induced mitochondrial 
stress and cardiac dysfunction: Restoration by superoxide dismutase mimetic Tempol. Am J 
Physiol. 2007; 293:H2776–H2737.
530. Maroko PR, Carpenter CB, Chiariello M, Fishbein MC, Radvany P, Knostman JD, Hale SL. 
Reduction by cobra venom factor of myocardial necrosis after coronary artery occlusion. J Clin 
Invest. 1978; 61:661–670. [PubMed: 641147] 
531. Marshall HE, Merchant K, Stamler JS. Nitrosation and oxidation in the regulation of gene 
expression. FASEB J. 2000; 14:1889–1900. [PubMed: 11023973] 
532. Martin M, Mory C, Piescher A, Wittekind C, Fiedler M, Uhlmann D. Protective effects of early 
CD4 +T cell reduction in hepatic ischemia/reperfusion injury. J Gastrointest Surg. 2010; 14:511–
519. [PubMed: 19937475] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 83
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
533. Martindale JJ, Fernandez R, Thuerauf D, Whittaker R, Gude N, Sussman MA, Glembotski CC. 
Endoplasmic reticulum stress gene induction and protection from ischemia/reperfusion injury in 
the hearts of transgenic mice with a tamoxifen-regulated form of ATF6. Circ Res. 2006; 
98:1186–1193. [PubMed: 16601230] 
534. Martindale JJ, Metzger JM. Uncoupling of increased cellular oxidative stress and myocardial 
ischemia reperfusion injury by directed sarcolemma stabilization. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2014; 
67:26–37. [PubMed: 24362314] 
535. Martinez D, Pentinat T, Ribo S, Daviaud C, Bloks VW, Cebria J, Villalmanzo N, Kalko SG, 
Ramon-Krauel M, Diaz R, Plosch T, Tost J, Jimenez-Chillaron JC. In utero undernutrition in 
male mice programs liver lipid metabolism in the second-generation offspring involving altered 
Lxra DNA methylation. Cell Metab. 2014; 19:941–951. [PubMed: 24794974] 
536. Martyn CN, Hales CN, Barker DJ, Jespersen S. Fetal growth and hyperinsulinaemia in adult life. 
Diabet Med. 1998; 15:688–694. [PubMed: 9702474] 
537. Marzocco S, Di Paola R, Autore G, Mazzon E, Pinto A, Caputi AP, Thiemermann C, Cuzzocrea 
S. Calpain inhibitor I reduces intestinal ischemia-reperfusion injury in the rat. Shock. 2004; 
21:38–44. [PubMed: 14676682] 
538. Massberg S, Enders G, Matos FC, Tomic LI, Leiderer R, Eisenmenger S, Messmer K, Krombach 
F. Fibrinogen deposition at the postischemic vessel wall promotes platelet adhesion during 
ischemia-reperfusion in vivo. Blood. 1999; 94:3829–3838. [PubMed: 10572098] 
539. Matsui Y, Kyoi S, Takagi H, Hsu CP, Hariharan N, Ago T, Vatner SF, Sadoshima J. Molecular 
mechanisms and physiological significance of autophagy during myocardial ischemia and 
reperfusion. Autophagy. 2008; 4:409–415. [PubMed: 18227645] 
540. Matsui Y, Takagi H, Qu X, Abdellatif M, Sakoda H, Asano T, Levine B, Sadoshima J. Distinct 
roles of autophagy in the heart during ischemia and reperfusion: Roles of AMP-activated protein 
kinase and Beclin 1 in mediating autophagy. Circ Res. 2007; 100:914–922. [PubMed: 17332429] 
541. Matsumoto S, Sakata Y, Nakatani D, Suna S, Mizuno H, Shimizu M, Usami M, Sasaki T, Sato H, 
Kawahara Y, Hamasaki T, Nanto S, Hori M, Komuro I. A subset of circulating microRNAs are 
predictive for cardiac death after discharge for acute myocardial infarction. Biochem Biophys 
Res Commun. 2012; 427:280–284. [PubMed: 22995291] 
542. Matsumoto S, Sakata Y, Suna S, Nakatani D, Usami M, Hara M, Kitamura T, Hamasaki T, Nanto 
S, Kawahara Y, Komuro I. Circulating p53-responsive microRNAs are predictive indicators of 
heart failure after acute myocardial infarction. Circ Res. 2013; 113:322–326. [PubMed: 
23743335] 
543. Matzinger P. The danger model: A renewed sense of self. Science. 2002; 296:301–305. [PubMed: 
11951032] 
544. Maurer M, Wedemeyer J, Metz M, Piliponsky AM, Welle rK, Chatterjea D, Clouthier DE, 
Yanagisawa MM. Mast cells promote homeostasis by limiting endothelin-1-induced toxicity. 
Nature. 2004; 432:512–516. [PubMed: 15543132] 
545. Mause SF, Weber C. Microparticles: Protagonists of a novel communication network for 
intercellular information exchange. Circ Res. 2010; 107:1047–1057. [PubMed: 21030722] 
546. Mazzoni MC, Borgstrom P, Warnke KC, Skalak TC, Intaglietta M, Arfors KE. Mechanisms and 
implications of capillary endothelial swelling and luminal narrowing in low-flow ischemias. Int J 
Microcirc Clin Exp. 1995; 15:265–270. [PubMed: 8852625] 
547. McCall CE, El Gazzar M, Liu T, Vachharajani V, Yoza B. Epigenetics, bioenergetics, and 
microRNA coordinate gene-specific reprogramming during acute systemic inflammation. J 
Leukoc Biol. 2011; 90:439–446. [PubMed: 21610199] 
548. McDonald B, Pittman K, Menezes GB, Hirota SA, Slaba I, Waterhouse CCM, Beck PL, Muruve 
DA, Kubes P. Intravascular danger signals guide neutrophils to sites of sterile inflammation. 
Science. 2010; 330:362–366. [PubMed: 20947763] 
549. McDougal WS. Renal perfusion/reperfusion injuries. J Urol. 1988; 140:1325–30. [PubMed: 
3057220] 
550. McManus DD, Freedman JE. MicroRNAs in platelet function and cardiovascular disease. Nat 
Rev Cardiol. 2015; 12:711–717. [PubMed: 26149483] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 84
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
551. Mehta D, Malik AB. Signaling mechanisms regulating endothelial permeability. Physiol. Rev. 
2006; 86:279–367. [PubMed: 16371600] 
552. Meldrum DR, Cleveland JC Jr, Meng X, Sheridan BC, Gamboni F, Cain BS, Harken AH, 
Banerjee A. Protein kinase C isoform diversity in preconditioning. J Surg Res. 1997; 69:183–
187. [PubMed: 9202667] 
553. Meller R, Pearson A, Simon RP. Dynamic changes in DNA methylation in ischemic tolerance. 
Front Neurol. 2015; 6:102. [PubMed: 26029158] 
554. Mendez I, Vazquez-Martinez O, Hernandez-Munoz R, Valente-Godinez H, Diaz-Munoz M. 
Redox regulation and pro-oxidant reactions in the physiology of circadian systems. Biochimie. 
2016; 124:178–186. [PubMed: 25926044] 
555. Menger MD, Thierjung C, Hammersen F, Messmer K. Dextran vs. hydroxyethylstarch in 
ischemic tolerance. Frontiersinhibitioninhibition of postischemic leukocyte adherence in 
neurology 6, 102 striated-striated muscle. Circ Shock. 1993; 41:248–255. [PubMed: 7511487] 
556. Menger MD, Pelikan S, Steiner D, Messmer K. Microvascular ischemia-reperfusion injury in 
striated muscle: Significance of “reflow paradox”. Am J Physiol. 1992; 263:H1901–1906. 
[PubMed: 1282785] 
557. Menger MD, Steiner D, Messmer K. Microvascular ischemia-reperfusion injury in striated 
muscle: Significance of “no reflow”. Am J Physiol. 1992; 263:H1892–1900. [PubMed: 1481913] 
558. Mengesdorf T, Jensen PH, Mies G, Aufenberg C, Paschen W. Down-regulation of parkin protein 
in transient focal cerebral ischemia: A link between stroke and degenerative disease? Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 2002; 99:15042–15047. [PubMed: 12415119] 
559. Menini S, Amadio L, Oddi G, Ricci C, Pesci C, Pugliese F, Giorgio M, Migliaccio E, Pelicci P, 
Iacobini C, Pugliese G. Deletion of p66Shc longevity gene protects against experimental diabetic 
glomerulopathy by preventing diabetes-induced oxidative stress. Diabetes. 2006; 55:1642–1650. 
[PubMed: 16731826] 
560. Metukuri MR, Beer-Stolz D, Namas RA, Dhupar R, Torres A, Loughran PA, Jefferson BS, Tsung 
A, Billiar TR, Vodovotz Y, Zamora R. Expression and subcellular localization of BNIP3 in 
hypoxic hepatocytes and liver stress. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2009; 296:G499–
509. [PubMed: 19147804] 
560a. Metz M, Maurer M. Mast cells-key effector cells in immune responses. Trends Immunol. 2007; 
28:234–241. [PubMed: 17400512] 
561. Meyer K, Zhang H, Zhang L. Direct effect of cocaine on epigenetic regulation of PKCe gene 
repression in the fetal rat heart. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2009; 47:504–511. [PubMed: 19538969] 
562. Miao W, Qu Z, Shi K, Zhang D, Zong Y, Zhang G, Hu S. RIP3 S-nitrosylation contributes to 
cerebral ischemic neuronal injury. Brain Res. 2015; 1627:165–176. [PubMed: 26319693] 
563. Milerova M, Charvatova Z, Skarka L, Ostadalova I, Drahota Z, Fialova M, Ostadal B. Neonatal 
cardiac mitochondria and ischemia/reperfusion injury. Mol Cell Biochem. 2010; 335:147–153. 
[PubMed: 19756957] 
564. Minamino T, Komuro I, Kitakaze M. Endoplasmic reticulum stress as a therapeutic target in 
cardiovascular disease. Circ Res. 2010; 107:1071–1082. [PubMed: 21030724] 
565. Miura T, Miki T. Limitation of myocardial infarct size in the clinical setting: Current status and 
challenges in translating animal experiments into clinical therapy. Basic Res Cardiol. 2008; 
103:501–513. [PubMed: 18716709] 
566. Moquin D, Chan FK. The molecular regulation of programmed necrotic cell injury. Trends 
Biochem Sci. 2010; 35:434–441. [PubMed: 20346680] 
567. Morgan MJ, Kim YS, Liu ZG. TNFa and reactive oxygen species in necrotic cell death. Cell Res. 
2008; 18:343–349. [PubMed: 18301379] 
568. Moritz KM, De Matteo R, Dodic M, Jefferies AJ, Arena D, Wintour EM, Probyn ME, Bertram JF, 
Singh RR, Zanini S, Evans RG. Prenatal glucocorticoid exposure in the sheep alters renal 
development in utero: Implications for adult renal function and blood pressure control. Am J 
Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2011; 301:R500–R509. [PubMed: 21593424] 
569. Muller FL, Song W, Liu Y, Chaudhuri A, Pieke-Dahl S, Strong R, Huang TT, Epstein CJ, Roberts 
LJ Jr, Csete M, Faulkner JA, Van Remmen H. Absence of CUZn superoxide dismutase leads to 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 85
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
elevated oxidative stress and acceleration of age-dependent skeletal muscle atrophy. Free Radic 
Biol Med. 2006; 40:1993–2004. [PubMed: 16716900] 
570. Muramatsu Y, Furuichi Y, Tojo N, Moriguchi A, Maemoto T, Nakada H, Hino M, Matsuoka N. 
Neuroprotective efficacy of FR901459, a novel derivative of cyclosporin A, in in vitro 
mitochondrial damage and in vivo transient cerebral ischemia models. Brain Res. 2007; 
1149:181–190. [PubMed: 17391653] 
571. Murayama T, Tanabe M, Matsuda S, Shimazu M, Kamei S, Wakabayashi G, Kawachi S, 
Matsumoto K, Yamazaki K, Matsumoto K, Koyasu S, Kitajima M. JNK (c-Jun NH2 terminal 
kinase) and p38 during ischemia reperfusion injury in the small intestine. Transplantation. 2006; 
81:1325–1330. [PubMed: 16699462] 
572. Murphy E, Steenbergen C. Ion transport and energetics during cell death and protection. 
Physiology (Bethesda). 2008; 23:115–123. [PubMed: 18400694] 
573. Murphy SP, Porrett PM, Turka LA. Innate immunity in transplant tolerance and rejection. 
Immunol Rev. 2011; 241:39–48. [PubMed: 21488888] 
574. Murriel CL, Churchill E, Inagaki K, Szweda LI, Mochly-Rosen D. Protein kinase Cd activation 
induces apoptosis in response to cardiac ischemia and reperfusion damage: A mechanism 
involving BAD and the mitochondria. J Biol Chem. 2004; 279:47985–47991. [PubMed: 
15339931] 
575. Murriel CL, Mochly-Rosen D. Opposing roles of delta and epsilonPKC in cardiac ischemia and 
reperfusion: Targeting the apoptotic machinery. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2003; 420:246–254. 
[PubMed: 14654063] 
576. Murry CE, Jennings RB, Reimer KA. Preconditioning with ischemia: A delay of lethal cell injury 
in ischemic myocardium. Circulation. 1986; 74:1124–1136. [PubMed: 3769170] 
577. Murry CE, Soonpaa MH, Reinecke H, Nakajima H, Nakajima HO, Rubart M, Pasumarthi KB, 
Virag JI, Bartelmez SH, Poppa V, Bradford G, Dowell JD, Williams DA, Field LJ. 
Haematopoietic stem cells do not transdifferentiate into cardiac myocytes in myocardial infarcts. 
Nature. 2004; 428:664–668. [PubMed: 15034593] 
578. Muschen M, Warskulat U, Peters-Regehr T, Bode JG, Kubitz R, Haussinger D. Involvement of 
CD95 (Apo-1/Fas) ligand expressed by rat Kupffer cells in hepatic immunoregulation. 
Gastroenterol. 1999; 116:666–677.
579. Muthusamy V, Bosenberg M, Wajapeyee N. Redefining regulation of DNA methylation by RNA 
interference. Genomics. 2010; 96:191–198. [PubMed: 20620207] 
580. Nakahira K, Hisata S, Choi AM. The roles of mitochondrial damage-associated molecular 
patterns in diseases. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2015; 23:1329–1350. [PubMed: 26067258] 
581. Nakano Y, Kondo T, Matsuo R, Hashimoto I, Kawasaki T, Kohno K, Myronovych A, Tadano S, 
Hisakura K, Ikeda O, Watganabe M, Murata S, Fukunaga K, Ohkohchi N. Platelet dynamics in 
the early phase of postischemic liver in vivo. J Surg Res. 2008; 149:192–198. [PubMed: 
18468625] 
582. Nardone G, Compare D, Liguori E, Di Mauro V, Rocco A, Barone M, Napoli A, Lapi D, Iovene 
MR, Colantuoni A. Protective effects of Lactobacillus paracasei F19 in a rat model of oxidative 
and metabolic hepatic injury. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2010; 299:G669–G676. 
[PubMed: 20576921] 
583. Netticadan T, Temsah R, Osada M, Dhalla NS. Status of Ca2+/calmodulin protein kinase 
phosphorylation of cardiac SR proteins in ischemia-reperfusion. Am J Physiol. 1999; 277:C384–
C391. [PubMed: 10484325] 
584. Neuhof C, Neuhof H. Calpain system and its involvement in myocardial ischemia and reperfusion 
injury. World J Cardiol. 2014; 6:638–652. [PubMed: 25068024] 
585. Ngoh GA, Facundo HT, Hamid T, Dillmann W, Zachara NE, Jones SP. Unique hexosaminidase 
reduces metabolic survival signal and sensitizes cardiac myocytes to hypoxia/reoxygenation 
injury. Circ Res. 2009; 104:41–49. [PubMed: 19023128] 
586. Niccoli G, Burzotta F, Galiuto L, Crea F. Myocardial no-reflow in humans. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2009; 54:281–292. [PubMed: 19608025] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 86
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
587. Niccoli G, Cosentino N, Spaziani C, Minelli S, Fracassi F, Crea F. New strategies for the 
management of no-reflow after primary percutaneous coronary intervention. Expert Rev 
Cardiovasc Ther. 2011; 9:615–630. [PubMed: 21615325] 
588. Nielsen M, Zimmer J, Diemer NH. Endonuclease G expression in thalamic reticular nucleus after 
global cerebral ischemia. Exp Brain Res. 2008; 190:81–89. [PubMed: 18568342] 
589. Nieswandt B, Pleines I, Bender M. Platelet adhesion and activation mechanisms in arterial 
thrombosis and ischaemic stroke. J Thromb Haemost. 2011; 9(Suppl 1):92–104.
590. Nilakantan V, Liang HL, Rajesh S, Mortensen J, Chandran K. Time-dependant protective effects 
of mangenese(III) tetrakis (1-methyl-4-pyridyl) porphyrin on mitochondrial function following 
renal ischemia-reperfusion injury. Free Radic Res. 2010; 44:773–782. [PubMed: 20380592] 
591. Nordente A, Martorana GE, Miggianno GA, Petitti T, Giardina B, Littaru GP, Santini SA. Free 
radical production by activated haem proteins: Protective effect of coenzyme Q. Mol Aspects 
Med. 1994; 15(Suppl):S109–S115. [PubMed: 7752822] 
592. Norman MU, Zbytnuik L, Kubes P. Interferon-γ limits lymphocyte adhesion to inflamed 
endothelium: A nitric oxide regulatory feedback mechanism. Eur J Immunol. 2008; 38:1368–
1380. [PubMed: 18412158] 
593. Northington FJ, Chavez-Valdez R, Graham EM, Razdan S, Gauda EB, Martin LJ. Necrostatin 
decreases oxidative damage, inflammation, and injury after neonatal HI. J Cereb Blood Flow 
Metab. 2011; 31:178–189. [PubMed: 20571523] 
594. Nourshargh S, Alon R. Leukocyte migration into inflamed tissues. Immunity. 2014; 41:694–707. 
[PubMed: 25517612] 
595. Nourshargh S, Hordijk PL, Sixt M. Breaching multiple barriers: Leukocyte motility through 
venular walls and the interstitium. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2010; 11:366–378. [PubMed: 
20414258] 
596. Nourshargh S, Renshaw SA, Imhof BA. Reverse migration of neutrophils: Where, when how, and 
why? Trends Immunol. 2016; 37:273–286. [PubMed: 27055913] 
597. O’Donnell CJ, Nabel EG. Genomics of cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med. 2011; 365:2098–
2109. [PubMed: 22129254] 
598. O’Farrell FM, Attwell D. A role for pericytes in coronary no-reflow. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2014; 
11:427–432. [PubMed: 24776704] 
599. Oerlemans MI, Koudstaal S, Chamuleau SA, de Kleijn DP, Doevendans PA, Sluijter JP. Targeting 
cell death in the reperfused heart: Pharmacological approaches for cardioprotection. Int J Cardiol. 
2013; 165:410–422. [PubMed: 22459400] 
600. Ojha S, Fainberg HP, Sebert S, Budge H, Symonds ME. Maternal health and eating habits: 
Metabolic consequences and impact on child health. Trends Mol Med. 2015; 21:126–133. 
[PubMed: 25662028] 
601. Okuno S, Saito A, Hayashi T, Chan PH. The c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase signaling pathway 
mediates Bax activation and subsequent neuronal apoptosis through interaction with Bim after 
transient focal cerebral ischemia. J Neurosci. 2004; 24:7879–7887. [PubMed: 15356200] 
602. Oliver MG, Specian RD, Perry MA, Granger DN. Morphologic assessment of leukocyte-
endothelial cell interactions in mesenteric venules subjected to ischemia and reperfusion. 
Inflammation. 1991; 15:331–346. [PubMed: 1684573] 
603. Ong SB, Gustafsson AB. New roles for mitochondria in cell death in the reperfused myocardium. 
Cardiovasc Res. 2012; 94:190–193. [PubMed: 22108916] 
604. Ong SB, Samangouei P, Kalkhoran SB, Hausenloy DJ. The mitochondrial permeability transition 
pore and its role in myocardial ischemia reperfusion injury. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2015; 78:23–34. 
[PubMed: 25446182] 
605. Ong SB, Subrayan S, Lim SY, Yellon DM, Davidson SM, Hausenloy DJ. Inhibiting mitochondrial 
fission protects the heart against ischemia/reperfusion injury. Circulation. 2010; 121:2012–2022. 
[PubMed: 20421521] 
606. Ordy JM, Wengenack TM, Bialobok P, Coleman PD, Rodier P, Baggs RB, Dunlap WP, Kates B. 
Selective vulnerability and early progression of hippocampal CA1 pyramidal cell degeneration 
and GFAP-positive astrocyte reactivity in the rat four-vessel occlusion model of transient global 
ischemia. Exp Neurol. 1993; 119:128–139. [PubMed: 8432346] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 87
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
607. Orlic D, Kajstura J, Chimenti S, Jakoniuk I, Anderson SM, Li B, Pickel J, McKay R, Nadal-
Ginard B, Bodine DM, Leri A, Anversa P. Bone marrow cells regenerate infarcted myocardium. 
Nature. 2001; 410:701–705. [PubMed: 11287958] 
608. Orsini F, Moroni M, Contursi C, Yano M, Pelicci P, Giorgio M, Migliaccio E. Regulatory effects 
of the mitochondrial energetic status on mitochondrial p66Shc. Biol Chem. 2006; 387:1405–
1410. [PubMed: 17081113] 
609. Osada M, Netticadan T, Kawabata K, Tamura K, Dhalla NS. Ischemic preconditioning prevents 
I/R-induced alterations in SR calcium-calmodulin protein kinase II. Am J Physiol. 2000; 
278:H1791–H1798.
610. Osman M, Russell J, Granger DN. Lymphocyte-derived interferon-γ mediates ischemia-
reperfusion-induced leukocyte and platelet adhesion in intestinal microcirculation. Am J Physiol. 
2009; 296:G659–G663.
611. Ostadal B, Ostadalova I, Kolar F, Sedmera D. Developmental determinants of cardiac sensitivity 
to hypoxia. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2014; 92:566–574. [PubMed: 24873901] 
612. Ostadal B, Ostadalova I, Kolar F, Sedmera D. The use of microRNAs to modulate redox and 
immune response to stroke. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2015; 22:187–202. [PubMed: 24359188] 
613. OuyangOuyang YB, Stary CM, White RE, Giffard RG. Developmental determinants of cardiac 
sensitivity to hypoxia. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2015; 92:566–574.
614. Ovize M, Thibault H, Przyklenk K. Myocardial conditioning: Opportunities for clinical 
translation. Circ Res. 2013; 113:439–450. [PubMed: 23908331] 
615. Pacher P, Beckman JS, Liaudet L. Nitric oxide and peroxynitrite in health and disease. Physiol 
Rev. 2007; 87:315–424. [PubMed: 17237348] 
616. Palladini G, Ferrigno A, Richelmi P, Perlini S, Vairetti M. Role of matrix metalloproteinases in 
cholestasis and hepatic ischemia/reperfusion injury: A review. World J Gastroenterol. 2015; 
21:12114–12124. [PubMed: 26576096] 
617. Pallast S, Arai K, Pekcec A, Yigitkanli K, Yu Z, Wang X, Lo EH, van Leyen K. Increased nuclear 
apoptosis-inducing factor after transient focal ischemia: A 12/15-lipoxygenase-dependent 
organelle damage pathway. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2010; 30:1157–1167. [PubMed: 
20068575] 
618. Pallast S, Arai K, Wang X, Lo EH, van Leyen K. 12/15-Lipoxygenase targets neuronal 
mitochondria under oxidative stress. J Neurochem. 2009; 111:882–889. [PubMed: 19737346] 
619. Paradies G, Petrosillo G, Paradies V, Ruggiero FM. Role of cardiolipin peroxidation and Ca2+ in 
mitochondrial dysfunction and disease. Cell Calcium. 2009; 45:643–650. [PubMed: 19368971] 
620. Parks DA, Bulkley GB, Granger DN, Hamilton SR, McCord JM. Ischemic injury in the cat small 
intestine: Role of superoxide radicals. Gastroenterology. 1982; 82:9–15. [PubMed: 6273253] 
621. Park P, Haas M, Cunningham PN, Bao L, Alexander JJ, Quigg RJ. Injury in renal ischemia-
reperfusion is independent from immunoglobulins and T-lymphocytes. Am J Physiol. 2002; 
282:F352–F357.
622. Park PO, Haglund U. Regeneration of small bowel mucosa after intestinal ischemia. Crit Care 
Med. 1992; 20:135–139. [PubMed: 1729031] 
623. Park S, Kondo T, Nakano Y, Murata S, Fukunaga K, Oda T, Sasakik R, Ohkohchi N. Platelet 
adhesion in the sinusoid caused hepatic injury by neutrophils after hepatic ischemia reperfusion. 
Platelets. 2010; 21:282–288. [PubMed: 20218909] 
624. Parks DA, Granger DN. Xanthine oxidase: Biochemistry, distribution and physiology. Acta 
Physiol Scand. 1986; 548:87–99.
625. Patel B, Fisher M. Therapeutic advances in myocardial microvascular resistance: Unravelling the 
enigma. Pharmacol Ther. 2010; 127:131–147. [PubMed: 20546779] 
626. Patterson AJ, Chen M, Xue Q, Xiao D, Zhang L. Chronic prenatal hypoxia induces epigenetic 
programming of PKC {epsilon} gene repression in rat hearts. Circ Res. 2010; 107:365–373. 
[PubMed: 20538683] 
626a. Patterson AJ, Zhang L. Hypoxia and fetal heart development. Curr Mol Med. 2010; 10:653–666. 
[PubMed: 20712587] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 88
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
626b. Patterson AJ, Xiao D, Xiong F, Dixon B, Zhang L. Hypoxia-derived oxidative stress mediates 
epigenetic repression of PKCε gene in foetal rat hearts. Cardiovasc Res. 2012; 93:302–310. 
[PubMed: 22139554] 
627. Pavlov VI, Tan YS, McClure EE, La Bonte LR, Zou C, Gorsuch WB, Stahl GL. Human mannose-
binding lectin inhibitor prevents myocardial injury and arterial thrombogenesis in a novel animal 
model. Am J Pathol. 2015; 185:347–355. [PubMed: 25482922] 
628. Pell VR, Chouchani ET, Murphy MP, Brookes PS, Krieg T. Moving forwards by blocking back-
flow: The Yin and Yang of MI Therapy. Circ Res. 2016; 118:898–906. [PubMed: 26941425] 
629. Peng S, Kuang Z, Zhang Y, Xu H, Cheng Q. The protective effects and potential mechanism of 
Calpain inhibitor Calpeptin against focal cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury in rats. Mol Biol 
Rep. 2011; 38:905–912. [PubMed: 20473717] 
630. Pepe S. Mitochondrial function in ischaemia and reperfusion of the ageing heart. Clin Exp 
Pharmacol Physiol. 2000; 27:745–750. [PubMed: 10972544] 
631. Peppiatt CM, Howarth C, Mobbs P, Attwell D. Bidirectional control of CNS capillary diameter by 
pericytes. Nature. 2006; 443:700–704. [PubMed: 17036005] 
632. Perez-Chanona E, Muhlbauer M, Jobin C. The microbiota protects against ischemia/reperfusion-
induced intestinal injury through nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing protein 2 
(NOD2) signaling. Am J Pathol. 2014; 184:2965–2975. [PubMed: 25204845] 
633. Perrelli M-G, Pagliaro P, Penna C. Ischemia/reperfusion injury and cardioprotective mechanisms: 
Role of mitochondria and reactive oxygen species. World J Cardiol. 2011; 3:186–200. [PubMed: 
21772945] 
634. Peters MJ, Dixon G, Kotowicz KT, Hatch DJ, Heyderman RS, Klein NJ. Circulating platelet-
neutrophil complexes represent a subpopulation of activated neutrophils primed for adhesion, 
phagocytosis and intracellular killing. Br J Haematol. 1999; 106:391–399. [PubMed: 10460597] 
634a. Petrovic-Djergovic D, Goonewardena SN, Pinsky DJ. Inflammatory disequilibrium in stroke. 
Circ Res. 2016; 119:142–158. [PubMed: 27340273] 
635. Phillips MJ, Voeltz GK. Structure and function of ER membrane contact sites with other 
organelles. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2016; 17:69–82. [PubMed: 26627931] 
636. Phillis JW, O’Regan MH. The role of phospholipases, cyclooxygenases, and lipoxygenases in 
cerebral ischemic/traumatic injuries. Crit Rev Neurobiol. 2003; 15:61–90. [PubMed: 14513863] 
637. Piao CS, Kim JB, Han PL, Lee JK. Administration of the p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580 affords 
brain protection with a wide therapeutic window against focal ischemic insult. J Neurosci Res. 
2003; 73:537–544. [PubMed: 12898538] 
638. Pigazzi A, Heydrick S, Folli F, Benoit S, Michelson A, Loscalzo J. Nitric oxide inhibits thrombin 
receptor-activating peptide-induced phosphoinositide 3-kinase activity in human platelets. J Biol 
Chem. 1999; 274:14368–14375. [PubMed: 10318860] 
639. Pinto AR, Ilinykh A, Ivey MJ, Kuwabara JT, D’Antoni ML, Debuque R, Chandran A, Wang L, 
Arora K, Rosenthal NA, Tallquist ML. Revisiting cardiac cellular composition. Circ Res. 2016; 
118:400–409. [PubMed: 26635390] 
639a. Podestà MA, Cucchiari D, Ponticelli C. The diverging roles of dendritic cells in kidney 
allotransplantation. Transplant Rev. 2015; 29:114–120.
639b. Prabhu SD, Frangogiannis NG. The biological basis for cardiac repair after myocardial 
infarction: From inflammation to fibrosis. Circ Res. 2016; 119:91–112. [PubMed: 27340270] 
640. Prakash A, Sundar SV, Zhu YG, Tran A, Lee JW, Lowell C, Hellman J. Lung ischemia-
reperfusion is a sterile inflammatory process influenced by commensal microbiota in mice. 
Shock. 2015; 44:272–279. [PubMed: 26196836] 
641. Premen AJ, Banchs V, Womack WA, Kvietys PR, Granger DN. Importance of collateral 
circulation in the vascularly occluded feline intestine. Gastroenterology. 1987; 92:1215–1219. 
[PubMed: 3557016] 
642. Pridjian AK, Levitsky S, Krukenkamp I, Silverman NA, Feinberg H. Developmental changes in 
reperfusion injury. A comparison of intracellular cation accumulation in the newborn, neonatal, 
and adult heart. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1987; 93:428–433. [PubMed: 2434806] 
643. Prime TA, Blaikie FH, Evans C, Nadtochiy SM, James AM, Dahm CC, Vitturi DA, Patel RP, 
Hiley CR, Abakumova I, Requejo R, Chouchani ET, Hurd TR, Garvey JF, Taylor CT, Brookes 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 89
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
PS, Smith RA, Murphy MP. A mitochondria-targeted S-nitrosothiol modulates respiration, 
nitrosates thiols, and protects against ischemia-reperfusion injury. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2009; 
106:10764–10769. [PubMed: 19528654] 
644. Proebstl D, Voisin MB, Woodfin A, Whiteford J, D’Acquisto F, Jones GE, Rowe D, Nourshargh 
S. Pericytes support neutrophil subendothelial cell crawling and breaching of venular walls in 
vivo. J Exp Med. 2012; 209:1219–1234. [PubMed: 22615129] 
645. Przyklenk K. Ischaemic conditioning: Pitfalls on the path to clinical translation. Br J Pharmacol. 
2015; 172:1961–1973. [PubMed: 25560903] 
646. Puglisi RN, Strande L, Santos M, Schulte G, Hewitt CW, Whalen TV. Beneficial effects of 
cyclosporine and rapamycin in small bowel ischemic injury. J Surg Res. 1996; 65:115–118. 
[PubMed: 8903456] 
647. Qin B, Yang H, Xiao B. Role of microRNAs in endothelial inflammation and senescence. Mol 
Biol Rep. 2012; 39:4509–4518. [PubMed: 21952822] 
648. Quartara L, Maggi CA. The tachykinin NK1 receptor. Part II: Distribution and pathophysiological 
roles. Neuropeptides. 1998; 32:1–49. [PubMed: 9571643] 
648a. Quesnelle KM, Bystrom PV, Toledo-Pereyra LH. Molecular responses to ischemia and 
reperfusion in the liver. Arch Toxicol. 2015; 89:651–657. [PubMed: 25566829] 
649. Raedschelders K, Ansley DM, Chen DDY. The cellular and molecular origin of reactive oxygen 
species generation during myocardial ischemia and reperfusion. Pharmacol Therap. 2012; 
133:230–255. [PubMed: 22138603] 
650. Rahimtoola SH. The hibernating myocardium. Am Heart J. 1989; 117:211–221. [PubMed: 
2783527] 
651. Ramos G, Hofmann U, Frantz S. Myocardial fibrosis through the lenses of T-cell biology. J Mol 
Cell Cardiol. 2016; 92:41–45. [PubMed: 26804387] 
652. Rautou PE, Vion AC, Amabile N, Chironi G, Simon A, Tedgui A, Boulanger CM. Microparticles, 
vascular function, and atherothrombosis. Circ Res. 2011; 109:593–606. [PubMed: 21852557] 
653. Ren M, Leng Y, Jeong M, Leeds PR, Chuang DM. Valproic acid reduces brain damage induced 
by transient focal cerebral ischemia in rats: Potential roles of histone deacetylase inhibition and 
heat shock protein induction. J Neurochem. 2004; 89:1358–1367. [PubMed: 15189338] 
654. Ren XP, Wu J, Wang X, Sartor MA, Qian J, Jones K, Nicolaou P, Pritchard TJ, Fan GC. 
MicroRNA-320 is involved in the regulation of cardiac ischemia/reperfusion injury by targeting 
heat-shock protein 20. Circulation. 2009; 119:2357–2366. [PubMed: 19380620] 
655. Ren Z, Jiang J, Lu H, Chen X, He Y, Zhang H, Xie H, Wang W, Zheng S, Zhou L. Intestinal 
microbial variation may predict early acute rejection after liver transplantation in rats. 
Transplantation. 2014; 98:844–852. [PubMed: 25321166] 
656. Reynaert NL, Guala AS, Wouters EF, van der Vliet A, Janssen-Heininger YM. Nitric oxide 
represses inhibitory κB kinase through S-nitrosylation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004; 
101:8945–8950. [PubMed: 15184672] 
657. Reynolds RM. Corticosteroid-mediated programming and the pathogenesis of obesity and 
diabetes. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2010; 122:3–9. [PubMed: 20117209] 
658. Riaz AA, Wan MX, Schaefer T, Schramm R, Ekberg H, Menger MD, Jeppsson B, Thorlacius H. 
Fundamental and distinct roles of P-selectin and LFA-1 in ischemia/reperfusion-induced 
leukocyte-endothelium interactions in the mouse colon. Ann Surg. 2002; 236:777–784. 
discussion 784. [PubMed: 12454516] 
659. Ribatti D. The crucial role of mast cells in blood-brain barrier alterations. Exp Cell Res. 2015; 
338:119–125. [PubMed: 26004870] 
660. Roberts VH, Frias AE, Grove KL. Impact of maternal obesity on fetal programming of 
cardiovascular disease. Physiology (Bethesda). 2015; 30(3):224–231. [PubMed: 25933822] 
661. Rocha-Ferreira E, Phillips E, Francesch-Domenech E, Thei L, Peebles DM, Raivich G, Hristova 
M. The role of different strain backgrounds in bacterial endotoxin-mediated sensitization to 
neonatal hypoxic-ischemic brain damage. Neuroscience. 2015; 311:292–307. [PubMed: 
26515746] 
662. Rodriguez SF, Granger DN. Role of blood cells in ischemia-reperfusion-induced endothelial 
barrier failure. Cardiovasc Res. 2010; 87:291–299. [PubMed: 20299333] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 90
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
663. Roe ND, Ren J. Nitric oxide synthase uncoupling: A therapeutic target in cardiovascular diseases. 
Vascul Pharmacol. 2012; 57:168–172. [PubMed: 22361333] 
664. Roerecke M, Rehm J. Alcohol consumption, drinking patterns, and ischemic heart disease: A 
narrative review of meta-analyses and a systematic review and meta-analysis of the impact of 
heavy drinking occasions on risk for moderate drinkers. BMC Med. 2014; 12:182. [PubMed: 
25567363] 
664a. Rossaint J, Zarbock A. Platelets in leucocyte recruitment and function. Cardiovasc Res. 2015; 
107:386–395. [PubMed: 25712962] 
665. Roy S, Khanna S, Hussain SR, Biswas S, Azad A, Rink C, Gnyawali S, Shilo S, Nuovo GJ, Sen 
CK. MicroRNA expression in response to murine myocardial infarction: miR-21 regulates 
fibroblast metalloprotease-2 via phosphatase and tensin homologue. Cardiovasc Res. 2009; 
82:21–29. [PubMed: 19147652] 
666. Romagnani S. Regulation of the T cell response. Clin Exptl Allergy. 2006; 36:1357–1366. 
[PubMed: 17083345] 
667. Romson JL, Hook BG, Kunkel SL, Abrams GD, Schork MA, Lucchesi BR. Reduction of the 
extent of ischemic myocardial injury by neutrophil depletion in the dog. Circulation. 1983; 
67:1016–1023. [PubMed: 6831665] 
668. Rork TH, Hadzimichalis NM, Kappil MA, Merrill GF. Acetaminophen attenuates peroxynitrite-
activated matrix metalloprotease-2-mediated troponin I cleavage in the isolated guinea pig 
myocardium. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2006; 40:553–561. [PubMed: 16530785] 
669. Rosen SE, Henry S, Bond R, Pearte C, Mieres JH. Sex-specific disparities in risk factors for 
coronary heart disease. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2015; 17(8):523.
670. Rosenbaum DM, Degterev A, David J, Rosenbaum PS, Roth S, Grotta JC, Cuny GD, Yuan J, 
Savitz SI. Necroptosis, a novel form of caspase-independent cell death, contributes to neuronal 
damage in a retinal ischemia-reperfusion injury model. J Neurosci Res. 2010; 88:1569–1576. 
[PubMed: 20025059] 
671. Rossaint J, Zarbock A. Platelets in leucocyte recruitment and function. Cardiovasc Res. 2015; 
107:386–395. [PubMed: 25712962] 
672. Rossen RD, Michael LH, Hawkins HK, Youker K, Dreyer WJ, Baughn RE, Entman ML. 
Cardiolipin-protein complexes and initiation of complement activation after coronary artery 
occlusion. Circ Res. 1994; 75:546–555. [PubMed: 8062428] 
673. Rotter D, Grinsfelder DB, Parra V, Pedrozo Z, Singh S, Sachan N, Rothermel BA. Calcineurin 
and its regulator, RCAN1, confer time-of-day changes in susceptibility of the heart to ischemia/
reperfusion. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2014; 74:103–111. [PubMed: 24838101] 
674. Roy S, Khanna S, Hussain SR, Biswas S, Azad A, Rink C, Gnyawali S, Shilo S, Nuovo GJ, Sen 
CK. MicroRNA expression in response to murine myocardial infarction: miR-21 regulates 
fibroblast metalloprotease-2 via phosphatase and tensin homologue. Cardiovasc Res. 2009; 
82:21–29. [PubMed: 19147652] 
675. Rudolf V, Freeman BA. Cardiovascular consequences when nitric oxide and lipid signaling 
converge. Circ Res. 2009; 105:511–512. [PubMed: 19745170] 
675a. Rueda-Clausen CF, Morton JS, Davidge ST. Effects of hypoxia-induced intrauterine growth 
restriction on cardiopulmonary structure and function during adulthood. Cardiovasc Res. 2009; 
81:713–722. [PubMed: 19088083] 
675b. Rueda-Clausen CF, Morton JS, Lopaschuk GD, Davidge ST. Long-term effects of intrauterine 
growth restriction on cardiac metabolism and susceptibility to ischaemia/reperfusion. Cardiovasc 
Res. 2011; 90:285–294. [PubMed: 21097804] 
675c. Rueda-Clausen CF, Morton JS, Dolinsky VW, Dyck JR, Davidge ST. Synergistic effects of 
prenatal hypoxia and postnatal high-fat diet in the development of cardiovascular pathology in 
young rats. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2012; 303:R418–R426. [PubMed: 
22739349] 
675d. Rueda-Clausen CF, Morton JS, Oudit GY, Kassiri Z, Jiang Y, Davidge ST. Effects of hypoxia-
induced intrauterine growth restriction on cardiac siderosis and oxidative stress. J Dev Orig 
Health Dis. 2012; 3(5):350–357. [PubMed: 25102264] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 91
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
676. Russell J, Cooper D, Tailor A, Stokes KY, Ganger DN. Low venular shear rates promote 
leukocyte-dependent recruitment of adherent platelets. Am J Physiol. 2003; 284:G123–G129.
676a. Ryan KJ, Elmes MJ, Langley-Evans SC. The effects of prenatal protein restriction on β-
adrenergic signalling of the adult rat heart during ischaemia reperfusion. J Nutr Metab. 
2012:397389. [PubMed: 22536490] 
677. Ryter SW, Alam J, Choi AMK. Heme oxygenase-1/carbon monoxide: From basic science to 
therapeutic applications. Physiol Rev. 2006; 86:583–650. [PubMed: 16601269] 
678. Ryter SW, Mizumura K, Choi AM. The impact of autophagy on cell death modalities. Int J Cell 
Biol. 2014; 2014:502676. Epub 2014 Feb 4. [PubMed: 24639873] 
679. Saitoh M, Nishitoh H, Fuji M, Takeda K, Tobiume K, Sawada Y, Kawabata M, Miyazono K, 
Ichijo H. Mammalian thioredoxin is a direct inhibitor of apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 
(ASK) 1. EMBO J. 1998; 17:2596–2606. [PubMed: 9564042] 
679a. Salehi S, Reed EF. The divergent roles of macrophages in solid organ transplantation. Curr Opin 
Organ Transplant. 2015; 20:446–453. [PubMed: 26154913] 
680. Salim SY, Young PY, Lukowski CM, Madsen KL, Sis B, Churchill TA, Khadaroo RG. VSL#3 
probiotics provide protection against acute intestinal ischaemia/reperfusion injury. Benef 
Microbes. 2013; 4:357–365. [PubMed: 24240573] 
681. Salter JW, Krieglstein CF, Isserkutz AC, Granger DN. Platelets modulate ischemia/reperfusion-
induced leukocyte recruitment in the mesenteric circulation. Am J Physiol. 2001; 281:G1432–
G1439.
682. Salvemini D, Cazzocrea S. Superoxide, superoxide dismutase and ischemic injury. Curr Opin 
Invest Drugs. 2002; 3:886–895.
683. Sanada S, Komuro I, Kitakaze M. Pathophysiology of myocardial reperfusion injury: 
Preconditioning, postconditioning, and translational aspects of protective measures. Am J 
Physiol. 2011; 301:H1723–H1741.
683a. Sansbury BE, Spite M. Resolution of acute inflammation and the role of resolvins in immunity, 
thrombosis, and vascular biology. Circ Res. 2016; 119:113–130. [PubMed: 27340271] 
684. Sant00E9;n S, Mihaescu A, Laschke MW, Menger MD, Wang Y, Jeppsson B, Thorlacius H. p38 
MAPK regulates ischemia-reperfusion-induced recruitment of leukocytes in the colon. Surgery. 
2009; 145:303–12. [PubMed: 19231583] 
685. Santen S, Wang Y, Menger MD, Jeppsson B, Thorlacius H. Mast-cell-dependent secretion of 
CXC chemokines regulates ischemia-reperfusion-induced leukocyte recruitment in the colon. Int 
J Colorectal Dis. 2008; 23:527–534. [PubMed: 18193431] 
686. Santora RJ, Lie ML, Grigoryev DN, Nasir O, Moore FA, Hassoun HT. Therapeutic distant organ 
effects of regional hypothermia during mesenteric ischemia-reperfusion injury. J Vasc Surg. 
2010; 52:1003–1014. [PubMed: 20678877] 
687. Sapega AA, Heppenstall RB, Chance B, Park YS, Sokolow D. Optimizing tourniquet application 
and release times in extremity surgery. A biochemical and ultrastructural study. J Bone Joint Surg 
Am. 1985; 67:303–314. [PubMed: 3968122] 
688. Saugstad JA. Non-coding RNAs in stroke and neuroprotection. Front Neurol. 2015; 6:50. 
[PubMed: 25821444] 
689. Savas C, Ozogul C, Karaoz E, Delibas N, Ozguner F. Splenectomy reduces remote organ damage 
after intestinal ischaemia-reperfusion injury. Acta Chir Belg. 2003; 103:315–320. [PubMed: 
12914370] 
690. Saxton NE, Barclay JL, Clouston AD, Fawcett J. Cyclosporin A pretreatment in a rat model of 
warm ischaemia/reperfusion injury. J Hepatol. 2002; 36:241–247. [PubMed: 11830336] 
691. Sayed D, Abdellatif M. MicroRNAs in development and disease. Physiol Rev. 2011; 91:827–887. 
[PubMed: 21742789] 
692. Saztpute SR, Park JM, Jang HR, Agreda P, Liu M, Gandalfo MT, Racusen L, Rabb H. The role 
for T cell repertoire/antigen-specific interactions in experimental kidney ischemia reperfusion 
injury. J Immunol. 2009; 183:984–992. [PubMed: 19561110] 
693. Schinzel AC, Takeuchi O, Huang Z, Fisher JK, Zhou Z, Rubens J, Hetz C, Danial NN, Moskowitz 
MA, Korsmeyer SJ. Cyclophilin D is a component of mitochondrial permeability transition and 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 92
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
mediates neuronal cell death after focal cerebral ischemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005; 
102:12005–12010. [PubMed: 16103352] 
694. Schofield ZV, Woodruff TM, Halai R, Wu MC, Cooper MA. Neutrophils–a key component of 
ischemia-reperfusion injury. Shock. 2013; 40:463–470. [PubMed: 24088997] 
695. Schroen B, Heymans S. Small but smart–microRNAs in the centre of inflammatory processes 
during cardiovascular diseases, the metabolic syndrome, and ageing. Cardiovasc Res. 2012; 
93:605–6013. [PubMed: 21994347] 
696. Schulz C, Massberg S. Platelets in atherosclerosis and thrombosis. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 
2012:111–133.
697. Schwartz BG, Kloner RA. Coronary no reflow. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2012; 52:873–882. [PubMed: 
21712046] 
698. Sciarretta S, Yee D, Ammann P, Nagarajan N, Volpe M, Frati G, Sadoshima J. Role of NADPH 
oxidase in the regulation of autophagy in cardiomyocytes. Clin Sci (Lond). 2015; 128:387–403. 
[PubMed: 25515000] 
699. Sciarretta S, Zhai P, Shao D, Maejima Y, Robbins J, Volpe M, Condorelli G, Sadoshima J. Rheb is 
a critical regulator of autophagy during myocardial ischemia: Pathophysiological implications in 
obesity and metabolic syndrome. Circulation. 2012; 125:1134–1146. [PubMed: 22294621] 
700. Sciarretta S, Zhai P, Volpe M, Sadoshima J. Pharmacological modulation of autophagy during 
cardiac stress. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2012; 60:235–241. [PubMed: 22710813] 
701. Scorrano L, Oakes SA, Opferman JT, Cheng EH, Sorcinelli MD, Pozzan T, Korsmeyer SJ. BAX 
and BAK regulation of endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+: A control point for apoptosis. Science. 
2003; 300:135–139. [PubMed: 12624178] 
702. Seldin MM, Meng Y, Qi H, Zhu W, Wang Z, Hazen SL, Lusis AJ, Shih DM. Trimethylamine N-
oxide promotes vascular inflammation through signaling of mitogen-activated protein kinase and 
nuclear factor-kappaB. J Am Heart Assoc. 2016; 5 pii: e002767. 
703. Sepramaniam S, Armugam A, Lim KY, Karolina DS, Swaminathan P, Tan JR, Jeyaseelan K. 
MicroRNA 320a functions as a novel endogenous modulator of aquaporins 1 and 4 as well as a 
potential therapeutic target in cerebral ischemia. J Biol Chem. 2010; 285:29223–29230. 
[PubMed: 20628061] 
704. Serino M, Blasco-Baque V, Nicolas S, Burcelin R. Far from the eyes, close to the heart: Dysbiosis 
of gut microbiota and cardiovascular consequences. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2014; 16:540–547. 
[PubMed: 25303894] 
705. Seronde MF, Vausort M, Gayat E, Goretti E, Ng LL, Squire IB, Vodovar N, Sadoune M, Samuel 
JL, Thum T, Solal AC, Laribi S, Plaisance P, Wagner DR, Mebazaa A, Devaux Y. Circulating 
microRNAs and outcome in patients with acute heart failure. PloS One. 2015; 10:e0142237. 
[PubMed: 26580972] 
706. Sessa WC. Molecular control of blood flow and angiogenesis: Role of nitric oxide. J Thromb 
Haemost. 2009; 7(Suppl 1):35–37. [PubMed: 19630764] 
707. Sesti C, Simkhovich BZ, Kalvinsh I, Kloner RA. Mildronate, a novel fatty acid oxidation 
inhibitor and antianginal agent, reduces myocardial infarct size without affecting hemodynamics. 
J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2006; 47:493–499. [PubMed: 16633095] 
708. Settergren M, Böhm F, Malmström RE, Chancon KM, Pernow J. L-arginine and 
tetrahydrobiopterin protects against ischemia/reperfusion-induced endothelial dysfunction in 
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitis and coronary artery disease. Atherosclerosis. 2009; 204:73–
78. [PubMed: 18849028] 
709. Sharma AK, Laubach VE, Ramos SI, Zhao Y, Stukenborg G, Linden J, Kron IL, Yang Z. 
Adenosine A2A receptor activation on CD4 +T lymphocytes and neutrophils attenuates lung 
ischemia-reperfusion injury. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2010; 139:474–482. [PubMed: 
19909990] 
710. Shen X, Wang Y, Gao F, Ren F, Busuttil RW, Kupiec-Weglinski JW, Zhai Y. CD4+ T cells 
promote tissue inflammation via CD40 signaling without de novo activation in a murine model of 
liver ischemia/reperfusion injury. Hepatology. 2009; 50:1537–1546. [PubMed: 19670423] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 93
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
711. Shen XD, Ke B, Zhai Y, Gao F, Anselmo D, Lassman CR, Busuttil RW, Kupiec-Weglinski JC. 
Stat4 and Stat6 signaling in hepatic ischemia/reperfusion injury in mice: HO-1 dependence of 
Stat4 disruption-mediated cytoprotection. Hepatology. 2003; 37:269–303.
712. Sheu EG, Oakes SM, Ahmadi-Yazdi C, Afnan J, Carroll MC, Moore FD. Restoration of skeletal 
muscle ischemia-reperfusion injury in humanized immunodeficient mice. Surgery. 2009; 
146:340–346. [PubMed: 19628094] 
713. Shi J, Fujiedo H, Kokubo Y, Wake K. Apoptosis of neutrophils and their elimination by Kupffer 
cells in rat liver. Hepatology. 1996; 24:1256–1263. [PubMed: 8903407] 
714. Shi J, Gilbert GE, Kokubo Y, Ohashi T. Role of the liver in regulating numbers of circulating 
neutrophils. Blood. 2001; 98:1226–1230. [PubMed: 11493474] 
715. Shi Y, Melnikov VY, Schrier RW, Edelstein CL. Downregulation of the calpain inhibitor protein 
calpastatin by caspases during renal ischemia-reperfusion. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2000; 
279:F509–F517. [PubMed: 10966930] 
716. Shichita T, Sugiyama Y, Ooboshi H, Sugimori H, Nakagawa R, Takeda I, Iwaki T, Okada Y, Iida 
M, Cua OJ, Iwakura Y, Yoshimura A. Pivotal role of cerebral interleukin-17-producing γδT cells 
in the delayed phase of ischemic brain injury. Nat Med. 2009; 15:946–951. [PubMed: 19648929] 
717. Shimamura K, Kawamura H, Nagara T, Kato T, Naito T, Kameyama H, Hatakeyama K, Abo T. 
Association of NKT cells and granulocytes with liver injury after reperfusion of the portal vein. 
Cell Immunol. 2005; 234:31–38. [PubMed: 15963482] 
717a. Shinagawa H, Frantz S. Cellular immunity and cardiac remodeling after myocardial infarction: 
Role of neutrophils, monocytes, and macrophages. Curr Heart Fail Rep. 2015; 12:247–254. 
[PubMed: 25721354] 
718. Shiotani S, Shimada M, Taketomi A, Soejima Y, Yoshizumi T, Hashimoto K, Shimokawa H, 
Maehara Y. Rho-kinase as a novel gene therapeutic target in treatment of cold ischemia/
reperfusion-induced acute lethal liver injury: Effect on hepatocellular NADPH oxidase system. 
Gene Ther. 2007; 14:1425–1433. [PubMed: 17671509] 
719. Shiva S, Sack MN, Greer JJ, Duranski M, Ringwoood LA, Burwell L, Wang X, MacArthur PH, 
Shoja A, Raghavachari N, Calvert JW, Brookes PS, Lefer DJ, Gladwin MT. Nitrite augments 
tolerance to ischemia/reperfusion injury via the modulation of mitochondrial electron transfer. J 
Exp Med. 2007; 204:2089–2102. [PubMed: 17682069] 
720. Sies, H. Oxidative stress: Introductory remarks. In: Sies, H., editor. Oxidative Stress. London: 
Academic Press; 1985. p. 1-8.
721. Simkhovich BZ, Przyklen kK, Kloner RA. Role of protein kinase C in ischemic “conditioning”: 
From first evidence to current perspectives. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther. 2013; 18:525–532. 
[PubMed: 23872508] 
722. Singbartl K, Forlow SB, Ley K. Platelet, but not endothelial, P-selectin is critical for neutrophil-
mediated acute postischemic renal failure. FASEB J. 2001; 15:2337–2344. [PubMed: 11689459] 
723. Singh D, Chander V, Chopra K. Cyclosporine protects against ischemia/reperfusion injury in rat 
kidneys. Toxicology. 2005; 207:339–347. [PubMed: 15664262] 
724. Sitailo LA, Tibudan SS, Denning MF. Bax activation and induction of apoptosis in human 
keratinocytes by the protein kinase C delta catalytic domain. J Invest Dermatol. 2004; 123:434–
443. [PubMed: 15304079] 
725. Slezak J, Tribulova N, Okruhlicova L, Dhingra R, Bajaj A, Freed D, Singal P. Hibernating 
myocardium: Pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2009; 
87:252–265. [PubMed: 19370079] 
726. Smith CC, Davidson SM, Lim SY, Simpkin JC, Hothersall JS, Yellon DM. Necrostatin: A 
potentially novel cardioprotective agent? Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 2007; 21:227–233. [PubMed: 
17665295] 
727. Smith CC, Yellon DM. Necroptosis, necrostatins and tissue injury. J Cell Mol Med. 2011; 
15:1797–1806. [PubMed: 21564515] 
728. Smith VA, Johnson T. Evaluation of an animal product-free variant of MegaCell MEM as a 
storage medium for corneas destined for transplantation. Ophthalmic Res. 2010; 43:33–42. 
[PubMed: 19829010] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 94
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
729. Solaini G, Harris DA. Biochemical dysfunction in heart mitochondria exposed to ischaemia and 
reperfusion. Biochem J. 2005; 390:377–394. [PubMed: 16108756] 
730. Song MA, Paradis AN, Gay MS, Shin J, Zhang L. Differential expression of microRNAs in 
ischemic heart disease. Drug Disc Today. 2015; 20:223–235.
731. Song L, Yang H, Wang HX, Tian C, Liu Y, Zeng XJ, Gao E, Kang YM, Du J, Li HH. Inhibition 
of 12/15 lipoxygenase by baicalein reduces myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury via 
modulation of multiple signaling pathways. Apoptosis. 2014; 19:567–580. [PubMed: 24248985] 
732. Sorimachi Y, Harada K, Saido TC, Ono T, Kawashima S, Yoshida K. Downregulation of 
calpastatin in rat heart after brief ischemia and reperfusion. J Biochem. 1997; 122:743–748. 
[PubMed: 9399577] 
733. Sorkine P, Szold O, Halpern P, Gutman M, Greemland M, Rudick V, Goldman G. Gut 
decontamination reduces bowel ischemia-induced lung injury in rats. Chest. 1997; 112:491–495. 
[PubMed: 9266889] 
734. Souza DG, Mendonça VA, de A Castro MS, Poole S, Teixeira MM. Role of tachykinin NK 
receptors on the local and remote injuries following ischaemia and reperfusion of the superior 
mesenteric artery in the rat. Br J Pharmacol. 2002; 135:303–312. [PubMed: 11815365] 
735. Souza DG, Vieira AT, Soares AC, Pinho V, Nicoli JR, Vieira LQ, Teixeira MM. The essential role 
of the intestinal microbiota in facilitating acute inflammatory responses. J Immunol. 2004; 
173:4137–4146. [PubMed: 15356164] 
736. Sozen E, Karademir B, Ozer NK. Basic mechanisms in endoplasmic reticulum stress and relation 
to cardiovascular diseases. Free Radic Biol Med. 2015; 78:30–41. [PubMed: 25452144] 
737. Spescha RD, Klohs J, Semerano A, Giacalone G, Derungs RS, Reiner MF, Rodriguez Gutierrez 
D, Mendez-Carmona N, Glanzmann M, Savarese G, Krankel N, Akhmedov A, Keller S, 
Mocharla P, Kaufmann MR, Wenger RH, Vogel J, Kulic L, Nitsch RM, Beer JH, Peruzzotti-
Jametti L, Sessa M, Luscher TF, Camici GG. Post-ischaemic silencing of p66Shc reduces 
ischaemia/reperfusion brain injury and its expression correlates to clinical outcome in stroke. Eur 
Heart J. 2015; 36:1590–1600. [PubMed: 25904764] 
738. Spescha RD, Shi Y, Wegener S, Keller S, Weber B, Wyss MM, Lauinger N, Tabatabai G, Paneni 
F, Cosentino F, Hock C, Weller M, Nitsch RM, Luscher TF, Camici GG. Deletion of the ageing 
gene p66(Shc) reduces early stroke size following ischaemia/reperfusion brain injury. Eur Heart 
J. 2013; 34:96–103. [PubMed: 23008506] 
739. Stahl GL, Xu Y, Hao L, Miller M, Buras JA, Fung M, Zhao H. Role for the alternative 
complement pathway in ischemia/reperfusion injury. Am J Pathol. 2003; 162:449–455. [PubMed: 
12547703] 
740. Stallion A, Kou TD, Latfi SQ, Miller KA, Dahms BB, Dudgeon DL, Levine AD. Ischemia/
reperfusion: A clinically relevant model of intestinal injury yielding systemic inflammation. J 
Pediatr Surg. 2005; 40:470–477. [PubMed: 15793720] 
741. Stark K, Eckart A, Haidari S, Tirniceriu A, Lorenz M, von Bruhl ML, Gartner F, Khandoga AG, 
Legate KR, Pless R, Hepper I, Lauber K, Walzog B, Massberg S. Capillary and arteriolar 
pericytes attract innate leukocytes exiting through venules and ‘instruct’ them with pattern-
recognition and motility programs. Nat Immunol. 2013; 14:41–51. [PubMed: 23179077] 
742. Stefanidakis M, Newton G, Lee WY, Parkos CA, Luscinskas FW. Endothelial CD47 interaction 
with SIRPγ is required for human T-cell transendothelial migration under shear flow conditions 
in vitro. Blood. 2008; 112:1280–1289. [PubMed: 18524990] 
743. Stocker R, Yamamoto Y, McDonagh A, Glazer A, Ames BN. Bilirubin is an antioxidant of 
possible physiological importance. Science. 1987; 235:1043–1045. [PubMed: 3029864] 
744. Stokes KY, Granger DN. Platelets: A critical link between inflammation and microvascular 
dysfunction. J Physiol. 2012; 590:1023–1034. [PubMed: 22183721] 
745. Stowe DF, Camara KS. Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species production in excitable cells: 
Modulators of mitochondrial and cell function. Antiox Redox Signal. 2009; 11:1373–1414.
746. Strasser RH, Simonis G, Schön SP, Braun MU, Ihl-Vahl R, Weinbrenner C, Marquetant R, Kübler 
W. Two distinct mechanisms mediate a differential regulation of protein kinase C isozymes in 
acute and prolonged myocardial ischemia. Circ Res. 1999; 85:77–87. [PubMed: 10400913] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 95
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
747. Strbian D, Karailainen-Lindsberg ML, Kovanen PT, Tatlisumak T, Lindsberg PJ. Mast cell 
stabilization reduces hemorrhage formation and mortality after administration of thrombolytics in 
experimental ischemic stroke. Circulation. 2007; 116:411–418. [PubMed: 17606844] 
748. Strbian D, Karialainen-Lindsberg ML, Tatlisumak T, Lindsberg PJ. Cerebral mast cells regulate 
early ischemic brain swelling and neutrophil accumulation. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2006; 
26:605–612. [PubMed: 16163296] 
749. Strbian D, Kovanen PT, Karajalainen-Lindsberg ML, Tatlisumak T, Lindsberg PJ. An emerging 
role of mast cells in cerebral ischemia and hemorrhage. Annals Med. 2009; 41:438–450.
750. Strock PE, Majno G. Vascular responses to experimental tourniquet ischemia. Surg Gynecol 
Obstet. 1969; 129:309–318. [PubMed: 5794406] 
751. Suematsu M, Ishimura Y. The heme oxygenase-carbon monoxide system: A regulator of 
hepatobiliary functions. Hepatology. 2000; 31:3–6. [PubMed: 10613719] 
752. Summers WK, Jamison RL. The no reflow phenomenon in renal ischemia. Lab Invest. 1974; 
25:635–643.
753. Sun J, Murphy E. Protein s-nitrosylation and cardioprotection. Circ Res. 2010; 106:285–296. 
[PubMed: 20133913] 
754. Sun J, Wu Q, Sun H, Qiao Y. Inhibition of histone deacetylase by butyrate protects rat liver from 
ischemic reperfusion injury. Int J Mol Sci. 2014; 15:21069–21079. [PubMed: 25405737] 
755. Sutherland BA, Rahman RMA, Apleton I. Mechanisms of action of green tea catechins, with a 
focus on ischemia-induced neurodegeneration. J Nutr Biochem. 2006; 17:291–306. [PubMed: 
16443357] 
756. Swank GM, Deitch EA. Role of the gut in multiple organ failure: Bacterial translocation and 
permeability changes. World J Surg. 1996; 20:411–417. [PubMed: 8662128] 
757. Symonds ME, Pope M, Sharkey D, Budge H. Adipose tissue and fetal programming. 
Diabetologia. 2012; 55:1597–1606. [PubMed: 22402988] 
758. Syrjälä SO, Keränen MA, Tuuminen R, Nykänen AI, Tammi M, Krebs R, Lemström KB. 
Increased Th17 rather than Th1 alloimmune response is associated with cardiac allograft 
vasculopathy after hypothermic presentation in the rat. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2010; 29:1047–
1057. [PubMed: 20591689] 
759. Szydlowska K, Tymianski M. Calcium, ischemia and excitotoxicity. Cell Calcium. 2010; 47:122–
129. [PubMed: 20167368] 
760. Tadimalla A, Belmont PJ, Thuerauf DJ, Glassy MS, Martindale JJ, Gude N, Sussman MA, 
Glembotski CC. Mesencephalic astrocyte-derived neurotrophic factor is an ischemia-inducible 
secreted endoplasmic reticulum stress response protein in the heart. Circ Res. 2008; 103:1249–
1258. [PubMed: 18927462] 
761. Tailor A, Cooper D, Granger DN. Platelet-vessel wall interactions in the microcirculation. 
Microcirc. 2005; 12:275–285.
762. Takagi H, Matsui Y, Hirotani S, Sakoda H, Asano T, Sadoshima J. AMPK mediates autophagy 
during myocardial ischemia in vivo. Autophagy. 2007; 3:405–407. [PubMed: 17471015] 
763. Takagi Y, Nozaki K, Sugino T, Hattori I, Hashimoto N. Phosphorylation of c-Jun NH(2)-terminal 
kinase and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase after transient forebrain ischemia in mice. 
Neurosci Lett. 2000; 294:117–120. [PubMed: 11058801] 
764. Takahashi M. NLRP3 in myocardial ischaemia-reperfusion injury: Inflammasome-dependent or -
independent role in different cell types. Cardiovasc Res. 2013; 99:4–5. [PubMed: 23737495] 
765. Talukdar HA, Foroughi Asl H, Jain RK, Ermel R, Ruusalepp A, Franzen O, Kidd BA, Readhead 
B, Giannarelli C, Kovacic JC, Ivert T, Dudley JT, Civelek M, Lusis AJ, Schadt EE, Skogsberg J, 
Michoel T, Bjorkegren JL. Cross-tissue regulatory gene networks in coronary artery disease. Cell 
Systems. 2016; 2:196–208. [PubMed: 27135365] 
766. Talukder MA, Zweier JL, Periasamy M. Targeting calcium transport in ischaemic heart disease. 
Cardiovasc Res. 2009; 84:345–352. [PubMed: 19640931] 
767. Tan JR, Koo YX, Kaur P, Liu F, Armugam A, Wong PT, Jeyaseelan K. microRNAs in stroke 
pathogenesis. Curr Mol Med. 2011; 11:76–92. [PubMed: 21342133] 
768. Tan L, Yu JT, Guan HS. Reservatrol exerts pharmacological preconditioning by activating 
PGC-1alpha. Med Hypoth. 2008; 71:664–667.
Kalogeris et al.
Page 96
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
769. Tankersley CG, Moldobaeva A, Wagner EM. Strain variation in response to lung ischemia: Role 
of MMP-12. Respir Res. 2012; 13:93. [PubMed: 23061826] 
770. Taylor MJ, Baicu SC. Current state of hypothermic machine perfusion preservation of organs: The 
clinical perspective. Cryobiology. 2010; 60:S20–35. [PubMed: 19857479] 
771. Taylor PB, Young BG. Effect of myocardial ischemia on uridine incorporation and histone 
acetylation. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 1982; 60:313–318. [PubMed: 6176304] 
772. Teoh NC, Ajamieh H, Wong HJ, Croft K, Mori T, Allison AC, Farrell GC. Microparticles mediate 
hepatic ischemia-reperfusion injury and are the targets of Diannexin (ASP8597). PloS One. 2014; 
9:e104376. [PubMed: 25222287] 
773. Terai K, Hiramoto Y, Masaki M, Sugiyama S, Kuroda T, Hori M, Kawase I, Hirota H. AMP-
activated protein kinase protects cardiomyocytes against hypoxic injury through attenuation of 
endoplasmic reticulum stress. Mol Cell Biol. 2005; 25:9554–9575. [PubMed: 16227605] 
774. Terao S, Yilmaz G, Stokes KY, Russell J, Ishikawa M, Kawase T, Granger DN. Blood cell-derived 
RANTES mediates cerebral microvascular dysfunction, inflammation, and tissue injury after 
focal ischemia-reperfusion. Stroke. 2008; 39:2560–257. [PubMed: 18635850] 
775. Tersteeg C, Heijnen HF, Eckly A, Pasterkamp G, Urbanus RT, Maas C, Hoefer IE, Nieuwland R, 
Farndale RW, Gachet C, de Groot PG, Roest M. FLow-induced PRotrusions (FLIPRs): A 
platelet-derived platform for the retrieval of microparticles by monocytes and neutrophils. Circ 
Res. 2014; 114:780–791. [PubMed: 24406984] 
776. Terui K, Enosawa S, Haga S, Zhang HQ, Kuroda H, Kouchi K, Matsunaga T, Yoshida H, 
Engelhardt JF, Irani K, Ohnuma N, Ozaki M. Stat3 confers resistance against hypoxia/
reoxygenation-induced oxidative injury in hepatocytes through upregulation of Mn-SOD. J 
Hepatol. 2004; 41:957–965. [PubMed: 15582129] 
777. Theoharidis TC, Kempuraj D, Tagen M, Conti P, Kalogeromitros D. Differential relased mast cell 
mediators and the pathogenesis of inflammation. Immunol Rev. 2007; 217:65–78. [PubMed: 
17498052] 
778. Theruvath TP, Snoddy MC, Zhong Z, Lemasters JJ. Mitochondrial permeability transition in liver 
ischemia and reperfusion: Role of c-Jun N-terminal kinase 2. Transplantation. 2008; 85:1500–
1504. [PubMed: 18497693] 
779. Thomas A, Lenglet S, Chaurand P, Deglon J, Mangin P, Mach F, Steffens S, Wolfender JL, Staub 
C. Mass spectrometry for the evaluation of cardiovascular diseases based on proteomics and 
lipidomics. Thromb Haemost. 2011; 106:20–33. [PubMed: 21614412] 
780. Thomas WS, Mori E, Copeland BR, Yu JQ, Morrissey JH, del Zappo GJ. Tissue factor contributes 
to microvascular defects following cerebral ischemia. Stroke. 1993; 24:847–853. [PubMed: 
8506556] 
781. Thon L, Möhlig H, Mathieu S, Lange A, Bulanova E, Winoto-Morbach S, Schütze S, Bulfone-
Paus S, Adam D. Ceramide mediates caspase-independent programmed cell death. FASEB J. 
2005; 19:1945–1956. [PubMed: 16319138] 
782. Thornburg KL, O’Tierney PF, Louey S. Review: The placenta is a programming agent for 
cardiovascular disease. Placenta. 2010; 31(Suppl):S54–S59. [PubMed: 20149453] 
783. Thuerauf DJ, Marcinko M, Gude N, Rubio M, Sussman MA, Glembotski CC. Activation of the 
unfolded protein response in infarcted mouse heart and hypoxic cultured cardiac myocytes. Circ 
Res. 2006; 99:275–282. [PubMed: 16794188] 
784. Tiefenbacher CP, Chilian WM, Mitchell M, Defily DV. Restoration of endothelium-dependent 
vasodilation after reperfusion injury by tetrahydrobiopterin. Circ. 1996; 94:1423–1429.
785. Toko H, Takahashi H, Kayama Y, Okada S, Minamino T, Terasaki F, Kitaura Y, Komuro I. ATF6 
is important under both pathological and physiological states in the heart. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 
2010; 49:113–120. [PubMed: 20380836] 
786. Tomita S, Li RK, Weisel RD, Mickle DA, Kim EJ, Sakai T, Jia ZQ. Autologous transplantation of 
bone marrow cells improves damaged heart function. Circulation. 1999; 100:II247–256. 
[PubMed: 10567312] 
787. Tomiyama K, Ikeda A, Ueki S, Nakao A, Stolz DB, Koike Y, Afrazi A, Gandhi C, Tokita D, 
Geller DA, Murase N. Inhibition of Kupffer cell-mediated early proinflammatory response with 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 97
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
carbon monoxide in transplant-induced hepatic ischemia/reperfusion injury in rats. Hepatology. 
2008; 48:1608–1620. [PubMed: 18972563] 
788. Toth A, Jeffers JR, Nickson P, Min JY, Morgan JP, Zambetti GP, Erhardt P. Targeted deletion of 
Puma attenuates cardiomyocyte death and improves cardiac function during ischemia-
reperfusion. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2006; 291:H52–60. [PubMed: 16399862] 
789. Tracey KJ. Physiology and immunology of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway. J Clin 
Invest. 2007; 117:289–296. [PubMed: 17273548] 
790. Trinei M, Migliaccio E, Bernardi P, Paolucci F, Pelicci P, Giorgio M. p66Shc, mitochondria, and 
the generation of reactive oxygen species. Methods Enzymol. 2013; 528:99–110. [PubMed: 
23849861] 
791. Tsubokawa T, Yamaguchi-Okada M, Calvert JW, Solaroglu I, Shimamura N, Yata K, Zhang JH. 
Neurovascular and neuronal protection by E64d after focal cerebral ischemia in rats. J Neurosci 
Res. 2006; 84:832–840. [PubMed: 16802320] 
792. Tsukamoto T, Chanthaphavong RS, Pape HC. Current theories on the pathophysiology of 
multiple organ failure after trauma. Injury. 2010; 41(1):21–26. [PubMed: 19729158] 
793. Tsung A, Hoffman RA, Izuishi K, Critchlow ND, Nakao A, Chan MH, Lotze MT, Geller DA, 
Billiar TR. Hepatic ischemia-reperfusion involves functional TLR4 signaling in nonparenchymal 
cells. J Immunol. 2005; 175:7661–7668. [PubMed: 16301676] 
794. Tsung A, Sahai R, Tanaka H, Takao A, Fink MP, Lotze MT, Yang H, Li J, Tracey KJ, Geller DA, 
Billiar TR. The nuclear factor HMGB1 mediates hepatic injury after liver ischemia-reperfusion. J 
Exp Med. 2005; 201:1135–1143. [PubMed: 15795240] 
795. Tuboly E, Futakuchi M, Varga G, Erces D, Tokes T, Meszaros A, Kaszaki J, Suzui M, Imai M, 
Okada A, Okada N, Boros M, Okada H. C5a inhibitor protects against ischemia/reperfusion 
injury in rat small intestine. Microbiol Immunol. 2016; 60:35–46. [PubMed: 26576826] 
796. Turer AT, Hill JA. Pathogenesis of myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury and rationale for 
therapy. Am J Cardiol. 2016; 106:360–368.
797. Uchida Y, Ke B, Freitas MCS, Ji H, Zhao D, Benjamin ER, Najafsan N, Yagita H, Akiba H, 
Busuttil RW, Kupiec-Weglinski JW. The emerging role of T cell immunoglobulin mucin-1 in the 
mechanism of liver ischemia and reperfusion injury in the mouse. Hepatology. 2010; 51:1363–
1372. [PubMed: 20091883] 
798. Uemura A, Naito Y, Matsubara T. Dynamics of Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II 
following acute myocardial ischemia-translocation and autophosphorylation. Biochem Biophys 
Res Commun. 2002; 297:997–1002. [PubMed: 12359253] 
799. Ufnal M, Zadlo A, Ostaszewski R. TMAO: A small molecule of great expectations. Nutrition. 
2015; 31:1317–1323. [PubMed: 26283574] 
800. Ulven T. Short-chain free fatty acid receptors FFA2/GPR43 and FFA3/GPR41 as new potential 
therapeutic targets. Front Endocrin. 2012; 3:111.
801. Urbich C, Kuehbacher A, Dimmeler S. Role of microRNAs in vascular diseases, inflammation, 
and angiogenesis. Cardiovasc Res. 2008; 79:581–588. [PubMed: 18550634] 
802. Ussher JR, Lopaschuk GD, Arduini A. Gut microbiota metabolism of L-carnitine and 
cardiovascular risk. Atherosclerosis. 2013; 231:456–461. [PubMed: 24267266] 
803. Vaghasiya JD, Sheth NR, Bhalodia YS, Jivani NP. Exaggerated liver injury produced by renal 
ischemia reperfusion in diabetes: Effect of exenatide. Saudi J Gastroenterol. 2010; 16:174–180. 
[PubMed: 20616412] 
804. Vakeva A, Meri S. Complement activation and regulator expression after anoxic injury of human 
endothelial cells. Acta Pathol Microbiol Immunol Scand. 1998; 106:1149–1156.
805. Valentim L, Laurence KM, Townsend PA, Carroll CJ, Soond S, Scarabelli TM, Knight RA, 
Latchman DS, Stephanou A. Urocortin inhibits Beclin1-mediated autophagic cell death in 
cardiac myocytes exposed to ischaemia/reperfusion injury. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2006; 40:846–
852. [PubMed: 16697404] 
806. Valko M, Leibfritz D, Moncol J, Cronin MTD, Mazur M, Telser J. Free radicals and antioxidants 
in normal functions and human disease. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2007; 39:44–84. [PubMed: 
16978905] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 98
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
807. van Ampting MT, Schonewille AJ, Vink C, Brummer RJ, van der Meer R, Bovee-Oudenhoven 
IM. Damage to the intestinal epithelial barrier by antibiotic pretreatment of salmonella-infected 
rats is lessened by dietary calcium or tannic acid. J Nutr. 2010; 140:2167–2172. [PubMed: 
20962149] 
808. Vanden Berghe T, Vandenabeele P, Pasparakis M, Bleich M, Weinberg JM, Reichel CA, Brasen 
JH, Kunzendorf U, Anders HJ, Stockwell BR, Green DR. Synchronized renal tubular cell death 
involves ferroptosis. Proc Nat Acad Sci. 2014; 111:16836–16841. [PubMed: 25385600] 
809. Vander Heide RS, Steenbergen C. Cardioprotection and myocardial reperfusion: Pitfalls to 
clinical application. Circ Res. 2013; 113:464–477. [PubMed: 23908333] 
810. Van der Vusse GJ, Reneman RS, van Bilsen M. Accumulation of arachidonic acid in ischemic/
reperfused cardiac tissue: Possible causes and consequences. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty 
Acids. 1997; 57:85–93. [PubMed: 9250613] 
811. van Leyen K, Kim HY, Lee SR, Jin G, Arai K, Lo EH. Baicalein and 12/15-lipoxygenase in the 
ischemic brain. Stroke. 2006; 37:3014–3018. [PubMed: 17053180] 
812. Vandenabeele P, Declercq W, Van Herreweghe F, Vanden Berghe T. The role of the kinases RIP1 
and RIP3 in TNF-induced necrosis. Sci Signal. 2010; 3(115):re4. [PubMed: 20354226] 
813. Vega VL, Mardones L, Maldonado M, Nicovani S, Manriquez V, Roa J, Ward PH. Xanthine 
oxidase released from reperfused hind limbs mediate kupffer cell activation, neutrophil 
sequestration, and hepatic oxidative stress in rats subjected to tourniquet shock. Shock. 2000; 
14:565–571. [PubMed: 11092691] 
814. Vickers MH. Developmental programming and transgenerational transmission of obesity. Ann 
Nutr Metab. 2014; 64(Suppl 1):26–34. [PubMed: 25059803] 
815. Vickers MH. Early life nutrition, epigenetics and programming of later life disease. Nutrients. 
2014; 6(6):2165–2178. [PubMed: 24892374] 
816. Vila-Petroff M, Salas MA, Said M, Valverde CA, Sapia L, Portiansky E, Hajjar RJ, Kranias EG, 
Mundiña-Weilenmann C, Mattiazzi A. CaMKII inhibition protects against necrosis and apoptosis 
in irreversible ischemia-reperfusion injury. Cardiovasc Res. 2007; 73:689–698. [PubMed: 
17217936] 
816a. Voisin MB, Nourshargh S. Neutrophil transmigration: Emergence of an adhesive cascade within 
venular walls. J Innate Immun. 2013; 5:336–347. [PubMed: 23466407] 
817. Vuohelainen V, Hamalainen M, Paavonen T, Karlsson S, Moilanen E, Mennander A. Inhibition of 
monoamine oxidase A increases recovery after experimental cardiac arrest. Interact Cardiovasc 
Thorac Surg. 2015; 21:441–449. [PubMed: 26116370] 
818. Wagers AJ, Conboy IM. Cellular and molecular signatures of muscle regeneration: Current 
concepts and controversies in adult myogenesis. Cell. 2005; 122:659–667. [PubMed: 16143100] 
819. Wagner S, Dybkova N, Rasenack EC, Jacobshagen C, Fabritz L, Kirchhof P, Maier SK, Zhang T, 
Hasenfuss G, Brown JH, Bers DM, Maier LS. Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II 
regulates cardiac Na+ channels. J Clin Invest. 2006; 116:3127–3138. [PubMed: 17124532] 
820. Wagner S, Maier LS. Modulation of cardiac Na(+) and Ca(2+) currents by CaM and CaMKII. J 
Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2006; 17(Suppl 1):S26–S33. [PubMed: 16686679] 
821. Wainwright CL, McCabe C, Kane KA. Endothelin and the ischaemic heart. Curr Vasc Pharmacol. 
2005; 3:333–341. [PubMed: 16248776] 
822. Wall TM, Sheehy R, Hartman JC. Role of bradykinin in myocardial preconditioning. J Pharmacol 
Exp Ther. 1994; 270:681–689. [PubMed: 8071859] 
823. Walsh SR, Boyle JR, Tang TY, Sadat U, Cooper DG, Lapsley M, Norden AG, Varty K, Hayes PD, 
Gaunt ME. Remote ischemic preconditioning for renal and cardiac protection during 
endovascular aneurysm repair: A randomized controlled trial. J Endovasc Ther. 2009; 16:680–
689. [PubMed: 19995115] 
824. Wang B, Huang Q, Zhang W, Li N, Li J. Lactobacillus plantarum prevents bacterial translocation 
in rats following ischemia and reperfusion injury. Dig Dis Sci. 2011; 56:3187–3194. [PubMed: 
21590333] 
825. Wang H, Zhang W, Zuo L, Zhu W, Wang B, Li Q, Li J. Bifidobacteria may be beneficial to 
intestinal microbiota and reduction of bacterial translocation in mice following ischaemia and 
reperfusion injury. Br J Nutr. 2013; 109:1990–1998. [PubMed: 23122253] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 99
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
826. Wang K, Zhang J, Liu J, Tian J, Wu Y, Wang X, Quan L, Xu H, Wang W, Liu H. Variations in the 
protein level of Omi/HtrA2 in the heart of aged rats may contribute to the increased susceptibility 
of cardiomyocytes to ischemia/reperfusion injury and cell death: Omi/HtrA2 and aged heart 
injury. Age (Dordr). 2013; 35:733–746. [PubMed: 22535253] 
827. Wang Y, Dawson VL, Dawson TM. Poly(ADP-ribose) signals to mitochondrial AIF: A key event 
in parthanatos. Exp Neurol. 2009; 218:193–202. [PubMed: 19332058] 
828. Wang Y, Ji HX, Xing SH, Pei DS, Guan QH. SP600125, a selective JNK inhibitor, protects 
ischemic renal injury via suppressing the extrinsic pathways of apoptosis. Life Sci. 2007; 
80:2067–2075. [PubMed: 17459422] 
829. Wang Z, Klipfell E, Bennett BJ, Koeth R, Levison BS, Dugar B, Feldstein AE, Britt EB, Fu X, 
Chung YM, Wu Y, Schauer P, Smith JD, Allayee H, Tang WH, DiDonato JA, Lusis AJ, Hazen 
SL. Gut flora metabolism of phosphatidylcholine promotes cardiovascular disease. Nature. 2011; 
472:57–63. [PubMed: 21475195] 
830. Wang Z, Roberts AB, Buffa JA, Levison BS, Zhu W, Org E, Gu X, Huang Y, Zamanian-Daryoush 
M, Culley MK, DiDonato AJ, Fu X, Hazen JE, Krajcik D, DiDonato JA, Lusis AJ, Hazen SL. 
Non-lethal inhibition of gut microbial trimethylamine production for the treatment of 
atherosclerosis. Cell. 2015; 163:1585–1595. [PubMed: 26687352] 
831. Webb A, Bond R, McLean P, Uppal R, Benjamin N, Ahluwalia A. Reduction of nitrite to nitric 
oxide during ischemia protects against myocardial ischemia-reperfusion damage. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 2004; 101:13683–13688. [PubMed: 15347817] 
832. Webster KA. Mitochondrial membrane permeabilization and cell death during myocardial 
infarction: Roles of calcium and reactive oxygen species. Future Cardiol. 2012; 8:863–884. 
[PubMed: 23176689] 
833. Wegener S, Gottschalk B, Jovanovic V, Knab R, Fiebach JB, Schellinger PD, Kucinski T, 
Jungehulsing GJ, Brunecker P, Muller B, Banasik A, Amberger N, Wehrens XH, Lehnart SE, 
Reiken SR, Marks AR. Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II phosphorylation regulates 
the cardiac ryanodine receptor. Circ Res. 2014; 94:e61–70.
834. Wegener S, Gottschalk B, Jovanovic V, Knab R, Fiebach JB, Schellinger PD, Kucinski T, 
Jungehulsing GJ, Brunecker P, Muller B, Banasik A, Amberger N, Wernecke KD, Siebler M, 
Rother J, Villringer A, Weih M. Transient ischemic attacks before ischemic stroke: 
Preconditioning the human brain? A multicenter magnetic resonance imaging study. Stroke. 
2004; 35:616–621. [PubMed: 14963288] 
835. Wehrens XH, Lehnart SE, Reiken SR, Marks AR. Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II 
phosphorylation regulates the cardiac ryanodine receptor. Circ Res. 2004; 94:e61–70. [PubMed: 
15016728] 
836. Wei Q, Yin XM, Wang MH, Dong Z. Bid deficiency ameliorates ischemic renal failure and delays 
animal death in C57BL/6 mice. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2006; 290:F35–42. [PubMed: 
16106037] 
837. Weinbroum AA, Hochhauser E, Rudick V, Kluger Y, Sorkine P, Karchevsky E, Graf E, Boher P, 
Flaishon R, Fjodorov D, Niv D, Vidne BA. Direct induction of acute lung and myocardial 
dysfunction by liver ischemia and reperfusion. J Trauma. 1997; 43:627–633. discussion 633-625. 
[PubMed: 9356059] 
838. Weisman HF, Bartow T, Leppo MK, Boyle MP, Marsh HC Jr, Carson GR, Roux KH, Weisfeldt 
ML, Fearon DT. Recombinant soluble CR1 suppressed complement activation, inflammation, 
and necrosis associated with reperfusion of ischemic myocardium. Trans Assoc Am Physicians. 
1990; 103:64–72. [PubMed: 2132543] 
839. Welborn MB III, Moldawer LL, Seeger JM, Minter RM, Huber TS. Role of endogenous 
interleukin-10 in local and distant organ injury after visceral ischemia-reperfusion. Shock. 2003; 
20:35–40. [PubMed: 12813366] 
840. Wells JM, Gaggar A, Blalock JE. MMP generated matrikines. Matrix Biol. 2015; 44–46:122–129.
841. Wershil BK, Wang ZS, Gordon JR, Galli SJ. Recruitment of neutrophils during IgE-dependent 
cutaneous late phase reactions in the mouse is mast cell-dependent. Partial inhibition of the 
reaction with antiserum against tumor necrosis factor-alpha. J Clin Invest. 1991; 87:446–453. 
[PubMed: 1991831] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 100
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
842. West JD, Marnett LJ. Endogenous reactive intermediates as modulators of cell signaling and cell 
death. Chem Res Toxicol. 2006; 19:173–194. [PubMed: 16485894] 
843. Whelan RS, Kaplinskiy V, Kitsis RN. Cell death in the pathogenesis of heart disease: 
Mechanisms and significance. Annu Rev Physiol. 2010; 72:19–44. [PubMed: 20148665] 
844. Willems IE, Havenith MG, DeMey JG, Chaponnier C, Brown RA. The alpha-smooth muscle 
actin-positive cells in healing human myocardial scars. Am J Pathol. 1994; 145:868–875. 
[PubMed: 7943177] 
845. Williams JP, Pechet TT, Weiser MR, Reid R, Kobzik L, Moore FD Jr, Carroll MC, Hechtman HB. 
Intestinal reperfusion injury is mediated by IgM and complement. J Appl Physiol. 1997; 86:938–
942.
846. Winek K, Engel O, Koduah P, Heimesaat MM, Fischer A, Bereswill S, Dames C, Kershaw O, 
Gruber AD, Curato C, Oyama N, Meisel C, Meisel A, Dirnagl U. Depletion of cultivatable gut 
microbiota by broad-spectrum antibiotic pretreatment worsens outcome after murine stroke. 
Stroke. 2016; 47:1354–1363. [PubMed: 27056982] 
847. Winek K, Meisel A, Dirnagl U. Gut microbiota impact on stroke outcome: Fad or fact? J Cereb 
Blood Flow Metab. 2016; 36:891–898. [PubMed: 26945017] 
848. Winquist RJ, Kerr S. Cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury and adhesion. Neurology. 1997; 
49:S23–S26. [PubMed: 9371145] 
849. Wittnich C. Age-related differences in myocardial metabolism affects response to ischemia. Age 
in heart tolerance to ischemia. Am J Cardiovasc Pathol. 1992; 4:175–180. [PubMed: 1524800] 
850. Wolf PS, Merry HE, Farivar AS, McCourtie AS, Mulligan MS. Stress-activated protein kinase 
inhibition to ameliorate lung ischemia reperfusion injury. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2008; 
135:656–665. [PubMed: 18329489] 
851. Woodfin A, Voisin MB, Beyrau M, Colom B, Caille D, Diapouli FM, Nash GB, Chavakis T, 
Albelda SM, Rainger GE, Meda P, Imhof BA, Nourshargh S. The junctional adhesion molecule 
JAM-C regulates polarized transendothelial migration of neutrophils in vivo. Nat Immunol. 2011; 
12:761–769. [PubMed: 21706006] 
852. Wu B, Qiu W, Wang P, Yu H, Cheng T, Zambetti GP, Zhang L, Yu J. p53 independent induction 
of PUMA mediates intestinal apoptosis in response to ischaemia-reperfusion. Gut. 2007; 56:645–
654. [PubMed: 17127703] 
853. Wu SY, Tang SE, Ko FC, Wu GC, Huang KL, Chu SJ, Wu J, Huang Z, Ren J, Zhang Z, He P, Li 
Y, Ma J, Chen W, Zhang Y, Zhou X, Yang Z, Wu SQ, Chen L, Han J. Mlkl knockout mice 
demonstrate the indispensable role of Mlkl in necroptosis. Cell Res. 2013; 23:994–1006. 
[PubMed: 23835476] 
854. Wu SY, Tang SE, Ko FC, Wu GC, Huang KL, Chu SJ. Valproic acid attenuates acute lung injury 
induced by ischemia-reperfusion in rats. Anesthesiology. 2015; 122:1327–1337. [PubMed: 
25749053] 
855. Wung SF, Hickey KT, Taylor JY, Gallek MJ. Cardiovascular genomics. J Nurs. 2013; 45:60–68.
856. Xie LH, Chen F, Karagueusian HS, Weiss JN. Oxidative stress-induced afterdepolarizations and 
calmodulin kinase II signaling. Circ Res. 2009; 104:79–86. [PubMed: 19038865] 
857. Xiong F, Lin T, Song M, Ma Q, Martinez SR, Lv J, MataGreenwood E, Xiao D, Xu Z, Zhang L. 
Antenatal hypoxia induces epigenetic repression of glucocorticoid receptor and promotes 
ischemic-sensitive phenotype in the developing heart. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2016; 91:160–171. 
[PubMed: 26779948] 
858. Xu CF, Yu CH, Li YM. Regulation of hepatic microRNA expression in response to ischemic 
preconditioning following ischemia/reperfusion injury in mice. OMICS. 2009; 13:513–520. 
[PubMed: 19780683] 
859. Xu H, Manivannan A, Jiang HR, Liversidge J, Shazrp PF, Forester JV, Crane IJ. Recruitment of 
IFN-γ-producing (Th1-like) cells into the inflamed retina in vivo is preferentially regulated by p-
selectin glycoprotein ligand 1: P/E-selectin interactions. J Immunol. 2004; 172:3215–3224. 
[PubMed: 14978129] 
860. Xu J, Zhao J, Evan G, Xiao C, Cheng Y, Xiao J. Circulating microRNAs: Novel biomarkers for 
cardiovascular diseases. J Mol Med. 2012; 90:865–870. [PubMed: 22159451] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 101
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
861. Xu X, Chua KW, Chua CC, Liu CF, Hamdy RC, Chua BH. Synergistic protective effects of 
humanin and necrostatin-1 on hypoxia and ischemia/reperfusion injury. Brain Res. 2010; 
1355:189–194. [PubMed: 20682300] 
862. Xu X, Zhang XA, Wang DW. The role of CYP450 epoxygenases and metabolites, 
epoxysatrienoic acids, cardiovascular and malignant diseases. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2011; 
63:597–608. [PubMed: 21477627] 
863. Xu Y, Huang S, Liu ZG, Han J. Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 signaling to mitochondria in 
necrotic cell death requires RIP1/TRAF2-mediated JNK1 activation. J Biol Chem. 2006; 
281:8788–8795. [PubMed: 16446354] 
863a. Xu Y, Williams SJ, O’Brien D, Davidge ST. Hypoxia or nutrient restriction during pregnancy in 
rats leads to progressive cardiac remodeling and impairs postischemic recovery in adult male 
offspring. FASEB J. 2006; 20:1251–1253. [PubMed: 16632594] 
864. Xu Z, Zhang J, David KK, Yang ZJ, Li X, Dawson TM, Dawson VL, Koehler RC. Endonuclease 
G does not play an obligatory role in poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-dependent cell death after 
transient focal cerebral ischemia. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2010; 299:R215–
R221. [PubMed: 20427721] 
864a. Xue Q, Zhang L. Prenatal hypoxia causes a sex-dependent increase in heart susceptibility to 
ischemia and reperfusion injury in adult male offspring: Role of protein kinase C epsilon. J 
Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2009; 330:624–632. [PubMed: 19470841] 
864b. Xue Q, Dasgupta C, Chen M, Zhang L. Foetal hypoxia increases cardiac AT(2)R expression and 
subsequent vulnerability to adult ischaemic injury. Cardiovasc Res. 2011; 89:300–308. [PubMed: 
20870653] 
864c. Xue Q, Chen P, Li X, Zhang G, Patterson AJ, Luo J. Maternal high-fat diet causes a sex-
dependent increase in AGTR2 expression and cardiac dysfunction in adult male rat offspring. 
Biol Reprod. 2015; 93:49. [PubMed: 26157067] 
865. Yamashiro S, Noguchi K, Kuniyoshi Y, Koja K, Sakanashi M. Role of tetrahydrobiopterin on 
ischemia-reperfusion injury in isolated injury in isolated perfused rat hearts. J Cardiovasc Surg 
(Torino). 2003; 44:37–49.
866. Yang JS, Lai EC. Alternative miRNA biogenesis pathways and the interpretation of core miRNA 
pathway mutants. Mol Cell. 2011; 43:892–903. [PubMed: 21925378] 
867. Yan L, Yang H, Li Y, Duan H, Wu J, Qian P, Li B, Wang S. Regulator of calcineurin 1-1L protects 
cardiomyocytes against hypoxia-induced apoptosis via mitophagy. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 
2014; 64:310–317. [PubMed: 24887685] 
868. Yang M, Stowe DF, Udoh KB, Heisner JS, Camara AK. Reversible blockade of complex I or 
inhibition of PKCbeta reduces activation and mitochondria translocation of p66Shc to preserve 
cardiac function after ischemia. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e113534. [PubMed: 25436907] 
869. Yang MQ, Ma YY, Ding J, Li JY. The role of mast cells in ischemia and reperfusion injury. 
Inflamm Res. 2014; 63:899–905. [PubMed: 25108401] 
870. Yang W, Guastella J, Huang JC, Wang Y, Zhang L, Xue D, Tran M, Woodward R, Kasibhatla S, 
Tseng B, Drewe J, Cai SX. MX1013, a dipeptide caspase inhibitor with potent in vivo 
antiapoptotic activity. Br J Pharmacol. 2003; 140:402–412. [PubMed: 12970077] 
871. Yang Y, Duan W, Li Y, Yan J, Yi W, Liang Z, Wang N, Yi D, Jin Z. New role of silent information 
regulator 1 in cerebral ischemia. Neurobiol Aging. 2013; 34:2879–2888. [PubMed: 23855981] 
872. Yang Y, Rosenberg GA. Matrix metalloproteinases as therapeutic targets for stroke. Brain Res. 
2015; 1623:30–38. [PubMed: 25916577] 
873. Yang Z, Sharma AK, Linden J, Kron IL, Laubach VE. CD4+ T lymphocytes mediate acute 
pulmonary ischemia-reperfusion injury. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2009; 137:695–702. 
[PubMed: 19258091] 
874. Yang ZJ, Carter EL, Kibler KK, Kwansa H, Crafa DA, Martin LJ, Roman RJ, Harder DR, 
Koehler RC. Attenuation of neonatal ischemic brain damage using a 20-HETE synthesis 
inhibitor. J Neurochem. 2012; 121:168–179. [PubMed: 22251169] 
875. Yaoita H, Ogawa K, Maehara K, Maruyama Y. Attenuation of ischemia/reperfusion injury in rats 
by a caspase inhibitor. Circulation. 1998; 97:276–281. [PubMed: 9462530] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 102
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
876. Yasojima K, Kilgore KS, Washington RA, Lucchesi BR, McGeer PL. Complement gene 
expression by rabbit heart: Upregulation by ischemia and reperfusion. Circ Res. 1998; 82:1224–
1230. [PubMed: 9633921] 
877. Ye Y, Hu Z, Lin Y, Zhang C, Perez-Polo JR. Downregulation of microRNA-29 by antisense 
inhibitors and a PPAR-gamma agonist protects against myocardial ischaemia-reperfusion injury. 
Cardiovasc Res. 2010; 87:535–544. [PubMed: 20164119] 
878. Ye Y, Perez-Polo JR, Aguilar D, Birnbaum Y. The potential effects of anti-diabetic medications on 
myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury. Basic Res Cardiol. 2011; 106:925–952. [PubMed: 
21892746] 
879. Ye Y, Perez-Polo JR, Qian J, Birnbaum Y. The role of microRNA in modulating myocardial 
ischemia-reperfusion injury. Physiol Genomics. 2011; 43:534–542. [PubMed: 20959496] 
880. Yellon DM, Downey JM. Preconditioning the myocardium: From cellular physiology to clinical 
cardiology. Physiol Rev. 2003; 83:1113–1151. [PubMed: 14506302] 
881. Yellon DM, Hausenloy DJ. Myocardial reperfusion injury. N Engl J Med. 2007; 357:1121–1135. 
[PubMed: 17855673] 
882. Yemisci M, Gursoy-Ozdemir Y, Vural A, Can A, Topalkara K, Dalkara T. Pericyte contraction 
induced by oxidative-nitrosative stress impairs capillary reflow despite successful opening of an 
occluded cerebral artery. Nat Med. 2009; 15:1031–1038. [PubMed: 19718040] 
883. Yigitkanli K, Pekcec A, Karatas H, Pallast S, Mandeville E, Joshi N, Smirnova N, Gazaryan I, 
Ratan RR, Witztum JL, Montaner J, Holman TR, Lo EH, van Leyen K. Inhibition of 12/15-
lipoxygenase as therapeutic strategy to treat stroke. Ann Neurol. 2013; 73:129–135. [PubMed: 
23192915] 
884. Yilmaz G, Granger DN. Cell adhesion molecules and ischemic stroke. Neurol Res. 2008; 30:783–
793. [PubMed: 18826804] 
885. Yilmaz G, Granger DN. Cell adhesion molecules and ischemic stroke. Neurol Res. 2008; 30:783–
793. [PubMed: 18826804] 
886. Yilmaz G, Granger DN. Leukocyte recruitment and ischemic brain injury. Neuromol Med. 2010; 
12:193–204.
887. Yin KJ, Deng Z, Huang H, Hamblin M, Xie C, Zhang J, Chen YE. miR-497 regulates neuronal 
death in mouse brain after transient focal cerebral ischemia. Neurobiol Dis. 2010; 38:17–26. 
[PubMed: 20053374] 
888. Yin KJ, Hamblin M, Chen YE. Non-coding RNAs in cerebral endothelial pathophysiology: 
Emerging roles in stroke. Neurochem Int. 2014; 77:9–16. [PubMed: 24704794] 
889. Yokota N, Burne-Taney M, Racusen L, Rabb H. Contrasting roles for STAT4 and STAT6 signal 
transduction pathways in murine renal ischemia-reperfusion injury. Am J Physiol. 2003; 
285:F319–F325.
890. Yoshiya K, Lapchak PH, Thai TH, Kannan L, Rani P, Lucca JJ, Tsokos GC. Depletion of gut 
commensal bacteria attenuates intestinal ischemia/reperfusion injury. Am J Physiol Gastrointest 
Liver Physiol. 2011; 301:G1020–G1030. [PubMed: 21903760] 
891. Youle RJ, Narendra DP. Mechanisms of mitophagy. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2011; 12:9–14. 
[PubMed: 21179058] 
892. Young GW, Wang Y, Ping P. Understanding proteasome assembly and regulation: Importance to 
cardiovascular medicine. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2008; 18:93–98. [PubMed: 18436147] 
893. Yu X, Kem DC. Proteasome inhibition during myocardial infarction. Cardiovasc Res. 2010; 
85:312–320. [PubMed: 19744947] 
894. Yuan Y, Wang JY, Xu LY, Cai R, Chen Z, Luo BY. MicroRNA expression changes in the 
hippocampi of rats subjected to global ischemia. J Clin Neurosci. 2010; 17:774–778. [PubMed: 
20080409] 
895. Yusof M, Kamad K, Gaskin FS, Korthuis RJ. Angiotensin II mediates postischemic leukocyte-
endothelial interactions: Role of calcitonin gene-related peptide. Am J Physiol Heart Circ 
Physiol. 2007; 292:H3032–3037. [PubMed: 17307998] 
896. Yusof M, Kamada K, Kalogeris T, Gaskin FS, Korthuis RJ. Hydrogen sulfide triggers late-phase 
preconditioning in postischemic small intestine by an NO- and p38 MAPK-dependent 
mechanism. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2009; 296:H868–H876. [PubMed: 19168723] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 103
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
897. Zaccagnini G, Martelli F, Fasanaro P, Magenta A, Gaetano C, Di Carlo A, Biglioli P, Giorgio M, 
Martin-Padura I, Pelicci PG, Capogrossi MC. p66ShcA modulates tissue response to hindlimb 
ischemia. Circulation. 2004; 109:2917–2923. [PubMed: 15173034] 
898. Zaman AK, French CJ, Spees JL, Binbrek AS, Sobel BE. Vascular rhexis in mice subjected to 
non-sustained myocardial ischemia and its therapeutic implications. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 
2011; 236:598–603. [PubMed: 21521712] 
899. Zernecke A, Preissner KT. Extracellular ribonucleic acids (RNA) enter the stage in cardiovascular 
disease. Circ Res. 2016; 118:469–479. [PubMed: 26846641] 
900. Zhai P, Sciarretta S, Galeotti J, Volpe M, Sadoshima J. Differential roles of GSK-3beta during 
myocardial ischemia and ischemia/reperfusion. Circ Res. 2011; 109:502–511. [PubMed: 
21737790] 
901. Zhang C. MicroRNAs in vascular biology and vascular disease. J Cardiovasc Transl Res. 2010; 
3:235–240. [PubMed: 20560045] 
902. Zhang M, Alicot EM, Carroll MC. Human natural IgM can induce ischemia/reperfusion injury in 
amurine intestinal model. Mol Immunol. 2008; 44:103–110.
903. Zhang M, Austen WG Jr, Chiu I, Alicot EM, Hung R, Ma M, Verna N, Xu M, Hechtman HB, 
Moore FD Jr, Carroll MC. Identification of a specific self-reactive IgM antibody that initiates 
intestinal ischemia/reperfusion injury. Proc Nat Acad Sci. 2004; 101:3886–3891. [PubMed: 
14999103] 
904. Zhang M, Carroll MC. Natural antibody mediated innate autoimmune response. Mol Immunol. 
2007; 44:103–110. [PubMed: 16876247] 
905. Zhang ZG, Chopp M. Neurorestorative therapies for stroke: Underlying mechanisms and 
translation to the clinic. Lancet Neurol. 2009; 8:491–500. [PubMed: 19375666] 
906. Zhang Z, Liang D, Gao X, Zhao C, Qin X, Xu Y, Su T, Sun D, Li W, Wang H, Liu B, Cao F. 
Selective inhibition of inositol hexakisphosphate kinases (IP6Ks) enhances mesenchymal stem 
cell engraftment and improves therapeutic efficacy for myocardial infarction. Basic Res Cardiol. 
2014; 109:417. [PubMed: 24847908] 
907. Zhang Y, Ramos BF, Jakschik BA. Neutrophil recruitment by tumor necrosis factor from mast 
cells in immune complex peritonitis. Science. 1992; 258:1957–1959. [PubMed: 1470922] 
908. Zhang C, Wa J, Xu X, Potter BJ, Gao X. Direct relationship between levels of TNFa expression 
and endothelial dysfunction in reperfusion injury. Basic Res Cardiol. 2010; 105:453–464. 
[PubMed: 20091314] 
909. Zhang T, Zhang Y, Cui M, Jin L, Wang Y, Lv F, Liu Y, Zheng W, Shang H, Zhang J, Zhang M, 
Wu H, Guo J, Zhang X, Hu X, Cao CM, Xiao RP. CaMKII is a RIP3 substrate mediating 
ischemia- and oxidative stress-induced myocardial necroptosis. Nat Med. 2016; 22:175–182. 
[PubMed: 26726877] 
910. Zhang XF, Zhang R, Huang L, Wang PX, Zhang Y, Jiang DS, Zhu LH, Tian S, Zhang XD, Li H. 
TRAF1 is a key mediator for hepatic ischemia/reperfusion injury. Cell Death Dis. 2014; 5:e1467. 
[PubMed: 25321474] 
911. Zhang Y, Zhao J, Lau WB, Jiao LY, Liu B, Yuan Y, Wang X, Gao E, Koch WJ, Ma XL, Wang Y. 
Tumor necrosis factor-alpha and lymphotoxin-alpha mediate myocardial ischemic injury via TNF 
receptor 1, but are cardioprotective when activating TNF receptor 2. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e60227. 
[PubMed: 23704873] 
912. Zhao BQ, Chauhan AK, Canau HM, Patten IS, Yang JJ, Dockal M, Scheiflinger F, Wagner DD. 
Von Willebrand factor-cleaving protease ADAMTS13 reduces ischemic brain injury in 
experimental stroke. Blood. 2009; 114:3329–3334. [PubMed: 19687510] 
913. Zhao H, Ning J, Lemaire A, Koumpa FS, Sun JJ, Fung A, Gu J, Yi B, Lu K, Ma D. Necroptosis 
and parthanatos are involved in remote lung injury after receiving ischemic renal allografts in 
rats. Kidney Int. 2015; 87:738–748. [PubMed: 25517913] 
914. Zhao H, Ren C, Chen X, Shen J. From rapid to delayed and remote postconditioning: The 
evolving concept of ischemic postconditioning in brain ischemia. Curr Drug Targets. 2012; 
13:173–187. [PubMed: 22204317] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 104
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
915. Zhao ZQ, Nakamura M, Wang NP, Velez DA, Hewan-Lowe KO, Guyton RA, Vinten-Johansen J. 
Dynamic progression of contractile and endothelial dysfunction and infarct extension in the late 
phase of reperfusion. J Surg Res. 2000; 94:133–144. [PubMed: 11104653] 
916. Zhao ZQ, Nakamura M, Wang NP, Wilcox JN, Shearer S, Ronson RS, Guyton RA, Vinten-
Johansen J. Reperfusion induces myocardial apoptotic cell death. Cardiovasc Res. 2000; 45:651–
660. [PubMed: 10728386] 
917. Zheng SY, Fu XB, Xu JG, Zhao JY, Sun TZ, Chen W. Inhibition of p38 mitogen-activated protein 
kinase may decrease intestinal epithelial cell apoptosis and improve intestinal epithelial barrier 
function after ischemia-reperfusion injury. World J Gastroenterol. 2005; 11:656–660. [PubMed: 
15655816] 
918. Zheng X, Zhang X, Sun H, Feng B, Li M, Chen G, Vladau C, Chen D, Suzuki M, Min L, Liu W, 
Zhong R, Garcia B, Jevnikar A, Min WP. Protection of renal ischemia injury using combination 
gene silencing of complement 3 and caspase 3 genes. Transplantation. 2006; 82:1781–1786. 
[PubMed: 17198276] 
919. Zhou Q, Lam PY, Han D, Cadenas E. c-Jun N-terminal kinase regulates mitochondrial 
bioenergetics by modulating pyruvate dehydrogenase activity in primary cortical neurons. J 
Neurochem. 2008; 104:325–335. [PubMed: 17949412] 
920. Zhu Q, Wani AA. Histone modifications: Crucial elements for damage response and chromatin 
restoration. J Cell Physiol. 2010; 223:283–288. [PubMed: 20112283] 
921. Zhu W, Gregory JC, Org E, Buffa JA, Gupta N, Wang Z, Li L, Fu X, Wu Y, Mehrabian M, Sartor 
RB, McIntyre TM, Silverstein RL, Tang WH, DiDonato JA, Brown JM, Lusis AJ, Hazen SL. Gut 
microbial metabolite TMAO enhances platelet hyperreactivity and thrombosis risk. Cell. 2016; 
165:111–124. [PubMed: 26972052] 
922. Zhuang S, Demirs JT, Kochevar IE. p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase mediates bid cleavage, 
mitochondrial dysfunction, and caspase-3 activation during apoptosis induced by singlet oxygen 
but not by hydrogen peroxide. J Biol Chem. 2000; 275:25939–25948. [PubMed: 10837470] 
923. Zile MR, Mehurg SM, Arroyo JE, Stroud RE, DeSantis SM, Spinale FG. Relationship between 
the temporal profile of plasma microRNA and left ventricular remodeling in patients after 
myocardial infarction. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2011; 4:614–619. [PubMed: 21956146] 
923a. Zuidema MY, Korthuis RJ. Intravital microscopic methods to evaluate anti-inflammatory effects 
and signaling mechanisms evoked by hydrogen sulfide. Methods Enzymol. 2015; 555:93–125. 
[PubMed: 25747477] 
924. Zweier JL, Flaherty JT, Weisfeldt ML. Direct measurement of free radical generation following 
reperfusion of ischemic myocardium. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1987; 84:1404–1407. [PubMed: 
3029779] 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 105
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 1. 
Major pathologic events contributing to ischemia/reperfusion injury. When the blood supply 
is markedly reduced or absent, ischemic cells switch to anaerobic metabolism to provide 
ATP. However, this results in cellular acidosis and insufficient ATP production to meet 
metabolic demand. As a consequence, ATPases are inactivated, while active Ca2+ efflux and 
Ca2+ reuptake by the endoplasmic reticulum are markedly reduced, with the net effect of this 
abherent ion transport producing Ca2+ overload in the cell. In addition, xanthine 
dehydrogenase is converted to XO during ischemia (see Fig. 7), coincident with 
accumulation of hypoxanthine, one of the substrates required to drive its enzymatic activity. 
On reperfusion, the delivery of oxygen and substrates required for aerobic ATP generation is 
restored as is extracellular pH via washout of accumulated H+ (pH paradox). The latter event 
promotes additional Ca2+ influx (calcium paradox), while the influx of oxygen fuels XO-
driven production of ROS (oxygen paradox) (see Fig. 7). ROS produced by this and other 
mechanisms can damage virtually every biomolecule found in cells, promote opening of 
mitochondrial PTPs, and activate inflammatory and thrombogenic cascades to exacerbate 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 106
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
cell injury. The latter events are further amplified by release of danger signals (e.g., ATP) 
and other proinflammatory and thrombogenic mediators from damaged cells (see text for 
further explanation). The ensuing massive influx of immunocytes at previously ischemic 
sites contribute to cell injury via the NADPH oxidase-driven respiratory burst, release of 
hydrolytic enzymes, and production of MPO-derived hypochlorous acid and N-chloramines. 
The development of the capillary no-reflow phenomenon during reperfusion results in 
nutritive perfusion impairment by mechanisms outlined in Figure 11.
Kalogeris et al.
Page 107
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 2. 
Total injury sustained by a tissue subjected to ischemia followed by reperfusion (I/R) (black 
bars) is attributable to ischemia per se (blue bars) and a component that is due to 
reestablishing the blood supply (red bars). At the onset of prolonged ischemia two separate 
general pathologic processes are initiated. The first are processes of tissue injury that are due 
to ischemia per se. The second are biochemical changes that occur during ischemia that 
contribute to the surge in generation of reactive oxygen species and infiltration of 
proinflammatory neutrophils and other immunocytes when molecular oxygen is 
reintroduced to the tissues during reperfusion. For a treatment to be effective in reducing 
cellular dysfunction and/or death when administered at the onset of reperfusion (therapeutic 
window), reestablishing the blood supply must occur before damage attributable to ischemia 
per se exceeds the viability threshold for irreversible damage. Concepts from Bulkley, 1987 
(100).
Kalogeris et al.
Page 108
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 3. 
Tissue responses to ischemia/reperfusion are bimodal (trimodal in the heart), depending on 
the duration and magnitude of ischemia. Prolonged and severe ischemia induces cell damage 
that progresses to infarction, with reperfusion paradoxically exacerbating tissue injury by 
invoking inflammatory responses. In the heart, shorter bouts of ischemia (5–20 min 
duration) induce myocardial stunning, wherein contractile function is initially impaired on 
reperfusion, but slowly improves, without progression to infarction and in the absence of 
significant inflammation. On the other hand, prolonged exposure to subacute levels of 
ischemia without reperfusion may induce myocardial hibernation, wherein cardiac cells 
modify their metabolic phenotype to survive but with a cost of reduced mechanical function. 
The third mode of response is exemplified by the tissue response to short periods of 
ischemia (<5 min) followed by reperfusion (ischemic conditioning) that do not produce 
detectable injury or dysfunction. Far from being innocuous and functionally inert, the 
response of all organs to such conditioning ischemia is characterized by activation of cell 
survival programs that confer tolerance to the deleterious effects induced by subsequent 
exposure to prolonged I/R such that postischemic injury is dramatically reduced. 
Cardioprotective effects are invoked when tissues are exposed to short bouts of conditioning 
I/R prior to (ischemic preconditioning) or during (ischemic per-conditioning) prolonged 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 109
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
ischemia or at the onset of reperfusion after prolonged cessation of blood flow (ischemic 
postconditioning). Tolerance to prolonged I/R in one organ can also be activated by 
subjecting distant organs to conditioning I/R, a remote effect that can also magnify the 
beneficial actions of local conditioning.
Kalogeris et al.
Page 110
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 4. 
Ingestion of probiotic diets modifies the composition profile of the oral and enteric 
microbiome to limit I/R via microflora-dependent alterations that decrease risk for 
cardiovascular disease via reductions in blood pressure, oral pathogens, blood LDL and total 
cholesterol, preservation of endothelium-dependent vasodilator mechanisms, activation of 
anti-inflammatory and infarct-sparing cell survival programs, and improved postischemic 
tissue remodeling.
Kalogeris et al.
Page 111
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 5. 
The presence of coexisting risk factors including metabolic syndrome, obesity, diabetes, 
advancing age, smoking, and dyslipidemias not only increase the likelihood for 
cardiovascular disease, but also worsen the outcome for those individuals who do suffer a 
heart attack or stroke. Interestingly, while ischemic and pharmacologic conditioning 
strategies are remarkably effective in young, healthy subjects, the presence of the 
aforementioned comorbid factors reduces their cardioprotective effects. The mechanisms 
underlying the impaired efficacy of conditioning is listed below each of the italicized co-
morbid risk factors in the figure. Surprisingly little attention has been devoted to the effect of 
cigarette smoking to limit the efficacy of conditioning or with regard to the mechanisms by 
which this impairment occurs. Caffeine consumption also reduces the effectiveness 
preconditioning, as does the ingestion of alcoholic beverages at high levels, an effect that 
disappears as the absorbed ethanol is metabolized and eliminated from the blood. While use 
of some recreational drugs (eg, cocaine) abolishes ischemic preconditioning, morphine (or 
other opioids) injections or smoking marijuana may induce preconditioned phenotypes via 
activation opioid and cannabinoid receptors, respectively. It is also important to note that 
many of the drugs commonly used in the therapeutic management of patients with 
cardiovascular disease who are at high risk for myocardial infarction or stroke reduce or 
abolish the effectiveness of preconditioning stimuli by affecting their underlying signaling 
mechanisms. Reproduced from Ref. 449, with permission.
Kalogeris et al.
Page 112
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 6. 
Cell death modalities in ischemia/reperfusion (I/R). I/R-induced necrosis generally occurs as 
a result of dysfunctional ion transport mechanisms, which causes cells to swell and 
eventually burst, effects that are exacerbated by plasma membrane damage. Release of 
proinflammatory mediators and damaged biomolecules initiates the influx of inflammatory 
cells such as neutrophils, which disrupt the extracellular matrix and cause damage to 
parenchyal cells by release of cytotoxic oxidants and hydrolytic enzymes. Apopotosis is a 
regulated form of cell death that causes cell shrinkage and condensation of the cytosol and 
nucleus, which eventually form apoptotic bodies. Because they are surrounded by cell 
membranes, apoptotic bodies can be engulfed and digested by phagocytes without evoking 
an inflammatory response. Autophagy provides a mechanism to remove damaged or 
senescent protein aggregates and organelles by enclosing them in membrane-lined vesicles 
called proteasomes which fuse with lysosomes containing enzymes that degrade the ingested 
material, usually without evoking an inflammatory response. While normally performing 
this “housekeeping” function, autophagy may also provide cells with a survival mechanism 
to withstand the deleterious effects of ischemia, by generating amino acids and fatty acids 
for cell function. However, when uncontrolled, autophagy contributes to ischemic cell death. 
While necrosis was once believed to occur from non-specific trauma or injury as a result of 
I/R, it now appears that postischemic infarction may also be attributable to programmed 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 113
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
events that require a dedicated molecular circuitry that has been termed programmed 
necrosis or necroptosis. Necroptosis is initiated by TNF-like cytokines that activate RIP 
kinases to mediate necrosis via increased production of reactive oxygen species and calcium 
overload, which in turn modulate the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (MPTP), 
leading to dissipation of the proton electrochemical gradient, with subsequent ATP 
depletion, further ROS production, and swelling and rupture of mitochondrial membranes. 
Recent genetic studies have suggested that the MPTP is predominantly involved in a second 
form of regulated necrosis that is designated MPT-RN that is critically dependent on 
cyclophilin D. Parthanotos can be distinguished from other forms of programmed cell death 
by its requirement for poly-ADP-ribose polymerase activation. Two newly described cell 
death modalities have been implicated in I/R, ferroptosis and oxytosis. Both involve 
inhibition of the cytine-glutamate antiporter Xc−, but differ in their modes of lipid 
peroxidation, being iron dependent and lipoxygenase dependent, respectively.
Kalogeris et al.
Page 114
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 7. 
Mechanism for XO-dependent production of ROS at the onset of reperfusion. During the 
period of ischemia, ATP is step-wise catabolized to hypoxanthine, which accumulates in the 
tissues because the lack of blood flow does not wash out metabolites from the tissues. 
Coincident with these changes, xanthine dehydrogenase is converted to XO by a proteolytic 
mechanism. Thus, a requisite substrate (hypoxanthine) and the activated enzyme (XO) are 
present in excess in ischemic tissues, but the oxidation of hypoxanthine to xanthine and uric 
acid cannot proceed, owing to the lack of molecular oxygen that is required to fuel the 
reaction. On reperfusion, this requisite substrate is suddenly resupplied to the tissue, which 
fuels the rapid overproduction of ROS. ROS-induced formation of chemoattractants 
promotes leukocyte infiltration, neutrophils in particular, which in turn exacerbate cellular 
injury via NADPH oxidase-dependent respiratory burst, MPO-mediated formation of 
hypochlorous acid, N-chloramines, and 2-chloro fatty acids (2ClFA), and release and 
activation of hydrolytic enzymes that target every type of biomolecule found in cells and 
tissues.
Kalogeris et al.
Page 115
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 8. 
Generation of ROS by mitochondria (mitoROS) is a nexus for both activation of cell survival 
programs that mediate the effect of conditioning stimuli to enhance tolerance to I/R and 
serves as a focal point for overexuberant ROS-induced ROS release that contributes to the 
pathogenesis of cell injury in I/R. On the one hand, ROS triggers the activation of cell 
survival programs in responses to a number of mildly noxious stimuli, such as short bouts of 
ischemia or antecedent ethanol exposure or pharmacologic agents (activators of 
mitochondrial ATP-sensitive potassium (mKATP) or large conductance, calcium-activated 
potassium (BKCa) channels. The enhanced tolerance to ischemia invoked by these 
mitoROS-dependent conditioning stimuli, which can be delivered before (preconditioning), 
during (perconditioning) or at the onset of reperfusion (postconditioning), activate protective 
protein kinases, such as PKCε, the expression of prosurvival genes (e.g., heme oxygenase-1) 
and mitochondrial antioxidant defenses (e.g., MnSOD, aldehyde dehydrogenase-1, or 
ALDH2), as well as targeting the MPTP to maintain the channel in a closed state. On the 
other hand, overexuberant ROS generation at the onset of reperfusion, driven by ROS-
induced ROS release that is fueled by electron transport chain dysfunction, especially at 
complexes I and III, and enhanced activities of p66Shc, MAO, and NADPH oxidase-4 
(Nox4) in mitochondria, causes the MPTP to open, leading to swelling, cell disruption, and 
Kalogeris et al.
Page 116
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
death. Not depicted is the effect of oxidants to alter the balance of mitochondrial fission and 
fusion in conditioning and I/R, which emerging evidence has implicated as contributory to 
both processes. The dual nature of ROS as protective vs damaging species relates to the type 
of ROS produced, their concentrations, and/or the compartmental localization for their 
production. MIcroRNAs (miR’s) formed during conditioning and during I/R produce 
changes in mitochondrial energy metabolism, apoptosis, mitochondrial fission/fusion 
balance, and ROS production. See text for further explanation. Modified from Refs. 406 and 
730.
Kalogeris et al.
Page 117
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 9. 
Functional roles and target genes for miRNAs implicated in ischemia/reperfusion and 
preconditioning. See text for further explanation.
Kalogeris et al.
Page 118
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 10. 
Neutrophil trafficking to ischemic sites occurs during reperfusion of ischemic tissues and 
involves 11 distinct steps. See text for further explanation. Figure modified from Refs. 923a 
and 816a.
Kalogeris et al.
Page 119
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 11. 
Mechanisms underlying the development of the postischemic capillary no-reflow 
phenomenon. See text for explanation.
Kalogeris et al.
Page 120
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 12. 
Overnutrition via consumption of a Western diet rich in red meats, lipids, and fructose and 
lacking fermentable fiber may contribute to a shift in the intestinal microbiome to a profile 
that favors enhanced risk for myocardial infarction, stroke, and peripheral vascular disease. 
As one example, consumption of protein-rich diets containing red meats leads to the 
liberation of carnitine and phosphatidyl choline as the bolus of ingested food is digested in 
the small bowel, which are converted to TMA by colonic microbes. Upon absorption, TMA 
is metabolized to the proatherogenic TMAO by the liver to promote the formation of 
atherosclerotic plaques. The problem is exacerbated by diet-induced dysbiosis, which favors 
the translocation of bacteria into the bloodstream and promotion of plaque formation. 
Interestingly, a blood-like microbiome exists in plaques that resembles the patient’s oral and 
intestinal microbial profiles, with some of the bacterial species correlating with plasma 
cholesterol levels. TMAO also contributes to a prothrombogenic phenotype via effects to 
increase platelet IP3 levels, thereby elevating intracellular calcium levels to promote platelet 
aggregration and adhesion to injured endothelium.
Kalogeris et al.
Page 121
Compr Physiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
