Comparative Protein Structure Modeling Using MODELLER
Benjamin Webb1 and Andrej Sali1
1University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California
Abstract
Comparative protein structure modeling predicts the three-dimensional structure of a given protein 
sequence (target) based primarily on its alignment to one or more proteins of known structure 
(templates). The prediction process consists of fold assignment, target-template alignment, model 
building, and model evaluation. This unit describes how to calculate comparative models using the 
program MODELLER and how to use the ModBase database of such models, and discusses all 
four steps of comparative modeling, frequently observed errors, and some applications. Modeling 
lactate dehydrogenase from Trichomonas vaginalis (TvLDH) is described as an example. The 
download and installation of the MODELLER software is also described.
Keywords
comparative modeling; ModBase; MODELLER; protein fold; protein structure; structure 
prediction
INTRODUCTION
Functional characterization of a protein sequence is one of the most frequent problems in 
biology. This task is usually facilitated by an accurate three-dimensional (3-D) structure of 
the studied protein. In the absence of an experimentally determined structure, comparative or 
homology modeling often provides a useful 3-D model for a protein that is related to at least 
one known protein structure (Marti-Renom et al., 2000; Fiser, 2004; Misura and Baker, 
2005; Petrey and Honig, 2005; Misura et al., 2006). Comparative modeling predicts the 3-D 
structure of a given protein sequence (target) based primarily on its alignment to one or more 
proteins of known structure (templates).
Comparative modeling consists of four main steps (Marti-Renom et al., 2000; Fig. 5.6.1): (i) 
fold assignment, which identifies similarity between the target and at least one known 
template structure; (ii) alignment of the target sequence and the template(s); (iii) building a 
model based on the alignment with the chosen template(s); and (iv) predicting model errors.
There are several computer programs and Web servers that automate the comparative 
modeling process (Table 5.6.1). The accuracy of the models calculated by many of these 
servers is evaluated by CAMEO (Haas et al., 2013) and the biannual CASP (Critical 
Assessment of Techniques for Proteins Structure Prediction; Moult, 2005; Moult et al., 
2009) experiment.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Published in final edited form as:
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. ; 54: 5.6.1–5.6.37. doi:10.1002/cpbi.3.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
While automation makes comparative modeling accessible to both experts and 
nonspecialists, manual intervention is generally still needed to maximize the accuracy of the 
models in the difficult cases. A number of resources useful in comparative modeling are 
listed in Table 5.6.1.
This unit describes how to calculate comparative models using the program MODELLER 
(Basic Protocol). The Basic Protocol goes on to discuss all four steps of comparative 
modeling (Fig. 5.6.1), frequently observed errors, and the ModBase database and associated 
Web services. The Support Protocol describes how to download and install MODELLER.
BASIC PROTOCOL: MODELING LACTATE DEHYDROGENASE FROM 
TRICHOMONAS VAGINALIS (TvLDH) BASED ON A SINGLE TEMPLATE 
USING MODELLER
MODELLER is a computer program for comparative protein structure modeling (Sali and 
Blundell, 1993; Fiser et al., 2000). In the simplest case, the input is an alignment of a 
sequence to be modeled with the template structures, the atomic coordinates of the 
templates, and a simple script file. MODELLER then automatically calculates a model 
containing all non-hydrogen atoms, within minutes on a modern PC and with no user 
intervention. Apart from model building, MODELLER can perform additional auxiliary 
tasks, including fold assignment, alignment of two protein sequences or their profiles (Marti-
Renom et al., 2004), multiple alignment of protein sequences and/or structures 
(Madhusudhan et al., 2006; Madhusudhan et al., 2009), calculation of phylogenetic trees, 
and de novo modeling of loops in protein structures (Fiser et al., 2000).
NOTE: Further help for all the described commands and parameters may be obtained from 
the MODELLER Web site (see Internet Resources).
Necessary Resources
Hardware
A computer running RedHat Linux (PC, Opteron, or EM64T/Xeon64 systems) 
or other version of Linux/Unix (x86/x86_64 Linux), Apple Mac OS X (10.6 or 
later), or Microsoft Windows (XP or later)
Software
The MODELLER 9.15 program, downloaded and installed from http://
salilab.org/modeller/download_installation.html (see Support Protocol)
Files
All files required to complete this protocol can be downloaded from http://
salilab.org/modeller/tutorial/basic-example.tar.gz (Unix/Linux) or http://
salilab.org/modeller/tutorial/basic-example.zip (Windows)
Webb and Sali
Page 2
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Background to TvLDH
A novel gene for lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was identified from the genomic sequence of 
Trichomonas vaginalis (TvLDH). The corresponding protein had higher sequence similarity 
to the malate dehydrogenase of the same species (TvMDH) than to any other LDH. The 
authors hypothesized that TvLDH arose from TvMDH by convergent evolution relatively 
recently (Wu et al., 1999). Comparative models were constructed for TvLDH and TvMDH 
to study the sequences in a structural context and to suggest site-directed mutagenesis 
experiments to elucidate changes in enzymatic specificity in this apparent case of convergent 
evolution. The native and mutated enzymes were subsequently expressed and their activities 
compared (Wu et al., 1999).
Searching structures related to TvLDH
Conversion of sequence to PIR file format—It is first necessary to convert the target 
TvLDH sequence into a format that is readable by MODELLER (file TvLDH.ali; Fig. 
5.6.2). MODELLER uses the PIR format to read and write sequences and alignments. The 
first line of the PIR-formatted sequence consists of >P1; followed by the identifier of the 
sequence. In this example, the sequence is identified by the code TvLDH. The second line, 
consisting of ten fields separated by colons, usually contains details about the structure, if 
any. In the case of sequences with no structural information, only two of these fields are 
used: the first field should be sequence (indicating that the file contains a sequence without 
a known structure) and the second should contain the model file name ( TvLDH in this case). 
The rest of the file contains the sequence of TvLDH, with an asterisk (*) marking its end. 
The standard uppercase single-letter amino acid codes are used to represent the sequence.
Searching for suitable template structures—A search for potentially related 
sequences of known structure can be performed using the profile.build () command of 
MODELLER (file build_profile.py). The command uses the local dynamic 
programming algorithm to identify related sequences (Smith and Waterman, 1981). In the 
simplest case, the command takes as input the target sequence and a database of sequences 
of known structure (file pdb_95.pir) and returns a set of statistically significant 
alignments. The input script file for the command is shown in Figure 5.6.3.
The script, build_profile.py, does the following:
1.
Initializes the “environment” for this modeling run by creating a new 
environ object (called env here). Almost all MODELLER scripts require 
this step, as the new object is needed to build most other useful objects.
2.
Creates a new sequence_db object, calling it sdb, which is used to 
contain large databases of protein sequences.
3.
Reads a file, in text format, containing nonredundant PDB sequences, into 
the sdb database. The sequences can be found in the file pdb_95.pir. 
This file is also in the PIR format. Each sequence in this file is 
representative of a group of PDB sequences that share 95% or more 
Webb and Sali
Page 3
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
sequence identity to each other and have less than 30 residues or 30% 
sequence length difference.
4.
Writes a binary machine-independent file containing all sequences read in 
the previous step.
5.
Reads the binary format file back in for faster execution.
6.
Creates a new “alignment” object ( aln), reads the target sequence TvLDH 
from the file TvLDH.ali, and converts it to a profile object ( prf). 
Profiles contain similar information to alignments, but are more compact 
and better for sequence database searching.
7.
prf.build() searches the sequence database ( sdb) with the target 
profile ( prf). Matches from the sequence database are added to the 
profile.
8.
prf.write() writes a new profile containing the target sequence and its 
homologs into the specified output file (file build_profile.prf; Fig. 
5.6.4). The equivalent information is also written out in standard 
alignment format.
The profile.build() command has many options (see Internet Resources for 
MODELLER Web site). In this example, rr_file is set to use the BLOSUM62 similarity 
matrix (file blosum62.sim.mat provided in the MODELLER distribution). Accordingly, 
the parameters matrix_offset and gap_penalties_1d are set to the appropriate values 
for the BLOSUM62 matrix. For this example, only one search iteration is run, by setting the 
parameter n_prof_iterations equal to 1. Thus, there is no need to check the profile for 
deviation ( check_profile set to False). Finally, the parameter max_aln_evalue is set 
to 0.01, indicating that only sequences with E-values smaller than or equal to 0.01 will be 
included in the output.
Execute the script using the command
python build_profile.py > build_profile.log
(or, if Python is not installed on the machine, with mod9.15 
build_profile.py). At the end of the execution, a log file is created 
( build_profile.log). MODELLER always produces a log file. Errors and 
warnings in log files can be found by searching for the _E> and _W> strings, 
respectively.
Selecting a template—An extract (omitting the aligned sequences) from the file 
build_profile.prf is shown in Figure 5.6.4. The first six commented lines indicate the 
input parameters used in MODELLER to create the alignments. Subsequent lines 
correspond to the detected similarities by profile.build(). The most important columns 
in the output are the second, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth columns. The second column 
reports the code of the PDB sequence that was aligned to the target sequence. The eleventh 
column reports the percentage sequence identities between TvLDH and the PDB sequence 
Webb and Sali
Page 4
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
normalized by the length of the alignment (indicated in the tenth column). In general, a 
sequence identity value above ~25% indicates a potential template, unless the alignment is 
too short (i.e., <100 residues). A better measure of the significance of the alignment is given 
in the twelfth column by the E-value of the alignment (lower the E-value the better).
In this example, six PDB sequences show very significant similarities to the query sequence, 
with E-values equal to 0. As expected, all the hits correspond to malate dehydrogenases 
(1bdm:A, 5mdh:A, 1b8p:A, 1civ:A, 7mdh:A, and 1smk:A). To select the appropriate 
template for the target sequence, the alignment.compare_structures() command will 
first be used to assess the sequence and structure similarity between the six possible 
templates (file compare.py; Fig. 5.6.5).
In compare.py, the alignment object aln is created and MODELLER is instructed to read 
into it the protein sequences and information about their PDB files. The command malign 
() calculates their multiple sequence alignment, which is subsequently used as a starting 
point for creating a multiple structure alignment by malign3d (). Based on this structural 
alignment, the compare_structures() command calculates the RMS and DRMS 
deviations between atomic positions and distances, differences between the main-chain and 
side-chain dihedral angles, percentage sequence identities, and several other measures. 
Finally, the id_table () command writes a file ( family.mat) with pairwise sequence 
distances that can be used as input to the dendrogram () command (or the clustering 
programs in the PHYLIP package; Felsenstein, 1989). dendrogram () calculates a 
clustering tree from the input matrix of pairwise distances, which helps visualizing 
differences among the template candidates. Excerpts from the log file ( compare.log) are 
shown in Figure 5.6.6.
The objective of this step is to select the most appropriate single template structure from all 
the possible templates. The dendrogram in Figure 5.6.6 shows that 1civ:A and 7mdh:A are 
almost identical, both in terms of sequence and structure. However, 7mdh:A has a better 
crystallographic resolution than 1civ:A (2.4 Å versus 2.8 Å). From the second group of 
similar structures (5mdh:A, 1bdm:A, and 1b8p:A), 1bdm:A has the best resolution (1.8 Å). 
1smk:A is most structurally divergent among the possible templates. However, it is also the 
one with the lowest sequence identity (34%) to the target sequence 
( build_profile.prf). 1bdm:A is finally picked over 7mdh:A as the final template 
because of its higher overall sequence identity to the target sequence (45%).
Aligning TvLDH with the template
One way to align the sequence of TvLDH with the structure of 1bdm:A is to use the 
align2d () command in MODELLER (Madhusudhan et al., 2006). Although align2d 
() is based on a dynamic programming algorithm (Needleman and Wunsch, 1970), it is 
different from standard sequence-sequence alignment methods because it takes into account 
structural information from the template when constructing an alignment. This task is 
achieved through a variable gap penalty function that tends to place gaps in solvent-exposed 
and curved regions, outside secondary structure segments, and between two positions that 
Webb and Sali
Page 5
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
are close in space. In the current example, the target-template similarity is so high that 
almost any alignment method with reasonable parameters will result in the same alignment.
The MODELLER script shown in Figure 5.6.7 aligns the TvLDH sequence in file 
TvLDH.ali with the 1bdm:A structure in the PDB file 1bdm.pdb ( file align2d.py). In 
the first line of the script, an empty alignment object aln, and a new model object mdl, into 
which chain A of the 1bmd structure is read, are created. append_model() transfers the 
PDB sequence of this model to aln and assigns it the name of 1bdmA ( align_codes). The 
TvLDH sequence, from file TvLDH.ali, is then added to aln using append (). The 
align2d () command aligns the two sequences and the alignment is written out in two 
formats, PIR ( TvLDH-1bdmA.ali) and PAP ( TvLDH-1bdmA.pap). The PIR format is used 
by MODELLER in the subsequent model-building stage, while the PAP alignment format is 
easier to inspect visually. In the PAP format, all identical positions are marked with a * (file 
TvLDH-1bdmA.pap; Fig. 5.6.8). Due to the high target-template similarity, there are only a 
few gaps in the alignment.
Model building
Once a target-template alignment is constructed, MODELLER calculates a 3-D model of the 
target completely automatically, using its automodel class. The script in Figure 5.6.9 will 
generate five different models of TvLDH based on the 1bdm:A template structure and the 
alignment in file TvLDH-1bdmA.ali (file model-single.py).
The first line (Fig. 5.6.9) loads the automodel class and prepares it for use. An automodel 
object is then created and called “a” and parameters are set to guide the model-building 
procedure. alnfile names the file that contains the target-template alignment in the PIR 
format. knowns defines the known template structure(s) in alnfile ( TvLDH-1bdmA.ali) 
and sequence defines the code of the target sequence. starting_model and 
ending_model define the number of models that are calculated (their indices will run from 
1 to 5). The last line in the file calls the make method that actually calculates the models. 
The most important output files are model-single.log, which reports warnings, errors, 
and other useful information including the input restraints used for modeling that remain 
violated in the final model, and TvLDH.B9999000[1–5].pdb, which contain the 
coordinates of the five produced models, in the PDB format. The models can be viewed by 
any program that reads the PDB format, such as Chimera (http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/) 
or RasMol (http://www.rasmol.org).
Evaluating a model
If several models are calculated for the same target, the best model can be selected by 
picking the model with the lowest value of the MODELLER objective function or the DOPE 
(Shen and Sali, 2006) or SOAP (Dong et al., 2013) assessment scores, which are reported at 
the end of the log file. (To calculate the SOAP score, download the SOAP-Protein library file 
from http://salilab.org/SOAP/ and uncomment the two SOAP-related lines in model-
single.py by removing the ‘#’ characters.) In this example, the second model 
( TvLDH.B99990002.pdb) has the lowest objective function and is selected. None of these 
Webb and Sali
Page 6
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
scores are absolute measures, in the sense that they can only be used to rank models 
calculated from the same alignment.
Once a final model is selected, there are many ways to further assess it. In this example, the 
DOPE potential in MODELLER is used to evaluate the fold of the selected model. Links to 
other programs for model assessment can be found in Table 5.6.1. However, before any 
external evaluation of the model, one should check the log file from the modeling run for 
runtime errors ( model-single.log) and restraint violations (see the MODELLER manual 
for details).
The script, evaluate_model.py (Fig. 5.6.10) evaluates the model with the DOPE 
potential. In this script, the atomic coordinates of the PDB file are read in (using 
complete_pdb ()) to a model object, mdl. This is necessary for MODELLER to correctly 
calculate the energy, and additionally allows for the possibility of the PDB file having atoms 
in a nonstandard order, or having different subsets of atoms (e.g., all atoms including 
hydrogens, while MODELLER uses only heavy atoms, or vice versa). The DOPE energy is 
then calculated using assess_dope(). An energy profile is additionally requested, 
smoothed over a 15-residue window, and normalized by the number of restraints acting on 
each residue. This profile is written to a file TvLDH.profile, which can be used as input to 
a graphing program such as GNUPLOT.
Similarly, the profile can be calculated for the template structure (see the scripts 
evaluate_template.py and plot_profiles.py in the zipfile). A comparison of the 
two profiles is shown in Figure 5.6.11. It can be seen that the DOPE score profile shows 
clear differences between the two profiles for the long active-site loop between residues 90 
and 100 and the long helices at the C-terminal end of the target sequence. This long loop 
interacts with region 220 to 250, which forms the other half of the active site. This latter 
region is well resolved in both the template and the target structure. However, probably due 
to the unfavorable nonbonded interactions with the 90 to 100 region, it is reported to be of 
high energy by DOPE. It is to be noted that a region of high energy indicated by DOPE may 
not always necessarily indicate actual error, especially when it highlights an active site or a 
protein-protein interface. However, in this case, the same active-site loops have a better 
profile in the template structure, which strengthens the argument that the model is probably 
incorrect in the active-site region. Resolution of such problems is beyond the scope of this 
unit, but is described in a more advanced modeling tutorial available at http://salilab.org/
modeller/tutorial/advanced.html.
Searching for existing models in the ModBase database
ModBase (http://salilab.org/modbase/; Pieper et al., 2014) is our database of annotated 
comparative protein structure models. These models are constructed using ModPipe (Eswar 
et al., 2003), a pipeline that automates the entire process of template selection, alignment, 
model building, and evaluation described earlier. In addition to the basic sequence-sequence 
template search employed above, it conducts a more thorough sequence-profile and profile-
profile search, leveraging PSI-BLAST (Altschul et al., 1997), HHBlits (Remmert et al., 
2012), HHSearch (Soding, 2005), and Modeller’s own functionality. Alignments created by 
Webb and Sali
Page 7
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
any of these methods can cover the complete target sequence, or only a segment of it, 
depending on the availability of suitable PDB templates.
Models in ModBase are organized in datasets. Because of the rapid growth of public 
sequence databases, efforts are concentrated on adding datasets that are useful for specific 
projects, rather than attempting to model all known protein sequences based on all 
detectably related known structures. Currently, ModBase includes a model dataset for each 
of 65 complete genomes, as well as datasets for all sequences in the Structure Function 
Linkage Database (SFLD; Pegg et al., 2006), and for the complete SwissProt/TrEMBL 
database as of 2005. As of 2015, ModBase contains almost 35 million reliable models for 
domains in 5.8 million unique protein sequences. Thus, for a sequence of interest, it is 
possible that models already exist in this database.
The ModBase database can be searched in many ways, e.g., by amino acid sequence, 
annotation keywords, the template used for modeling, accession number (such as from 
UniProt; Bairoch et al., 2005; Benson et al., 2013), gene name, or organism. It is also 
accessible from the Protein Model Portal (http://proteinmodelportal.org; Arnold et al., 2009; 
Haas et al., 2013) and is cross-linked to many other databases, such as UniProt.
ModBase can be searched for the TvLDH sequence, which was modeled above (Fig. 5.6.2), 
from the main ModBase search page (http://salilab.org/modbase/), by selecting “Sequence 
Similarity (Blast)” from the “Search type” drop-down menu, selecting the “100 % Sequence 
identity” button, and then pasting the raw TvLDH sequence (without the FASTA header) 
into the search box. On pressing the Search button, the ModBase Sequence Overview page 
is obtained (Fig. 5.6.12). On clicking the coverage sketch (the blue bar on the left side of 
that page), the Model Details page is displayed (Fig. 5.6.13).
At the time of this writing, ModBase contains two models for the exact TvLDH sequence 
used here. These models can be selected by clicking on the small protein images on the right 
side of the Model Details page. The models are similar, differing only in the template used; 
one model uses the same template (1bdmA) that was chosen for the Modeller run, and the 
other uses 5mdhA. A key feature of ModPipe is that the validity of sequence–structure 
relationships is not pre-judged at the fold-assignment stage; instead, sequence-structure 
matches are assessed after the construction of the models and their evaluation. This approach 
enables a thorough exploration of fold assignments, sequence–structure alignments, and 
conformations, with the aim of finding the model with the best evaluation score at the 
expense of increasing the computational time significantly; for some sequences, a few 
thousand models can be calculated. In this case, the model built using 5mdhA actually has 
slightly better assessment scores than that using 1bdmA, even though 1bdmA appeared 
earlier to be a better-quality template.
The Model Details page also displays basic information about each model, such as the 
template used, the portion of the sequence that was aligned, the date it was created, and a 
variety of assessment scores. These scores include a normalized (z-score) version of DOPE 
as above; the GA341 score (Melo and Sali, 2007); ModPipe’s own quality score (MPQS; 
Pieper et al., 2011), which is a linear combination of DOPE, GA341, and other scores; and a 
Webb and Sali
Page 8
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
prediction from TSVMod (Eramian et al., 2008) of the Cα root-mean-squared deviation 
(RMSD) and native overlap (the fraction of Cα atoms within 3.5 Å of their native positions). 
Finally the “Perform action on this model” drop-down menu allows the alignment used in 
modeling and the models to be downloaded.
Adding new models to ModBase
If a sequence does not yet have a model in ModBase, the ModWeb (http://salilab.org/
modweb/; Eswar et al., 2003) Web server can be used to model it. ModWeb is a front end to 
ModPipe and is simple to use; a user needs to provide only an amino acid sequence to 
model. The entire ModPipe pipeline then runs automatically, and any models generated are 
uploaded into ModBase where they can be viewed or downloaded in the same way as any 
other ModBase model. By default, such models are added to the public datasets so that other 
users of ModBase can see them too; alternatively, the model dataset can be made private, or 
the models can be e-mailed to the user rather than uploaded into ModBase.
If a sequence already has models in ModBase, but they were generated some time ago, the 
Model Details page allows the user to request an update. This action rebuilds the models, 
potentially using any newer templates that have been deposited in the PDB since the last 
calculation. For example, for TvLDH, new structures (4UUM and 4UUN) that are almost 
100% identical in sequence were recently deposited (in Aug 2015), and would almost 
certainly yield better models.
Other Web tools for model evaluation, validation, refinement, and analysis
ModWeb is one of the Web services associated with the ModBase database. A number of 
other such Web services exist. These services generally take as input one or more PDB files, 
so they can be used with models extracted from ModBase, atomic structures from the PDB 
itself, or models manually generated with MODELLER or another Web service. A selection 
of these servers is outlined here.
The ModEval server (http://salilab.org/modeval/; Pieper et al., 2011) takes as input a protein 
structure, an alignment in the PIR format, and the sequence–template sequence identity. The 
modeling alignment and sequence identity are optional, but should be provided if available 
as they result in more accurate assessment scores. In the TvLDH case above, the modeling 
alignment is available in Fig. 5.6.8 and the sequence identity can be read from the header of 
each model PDB file. The server then computes the TSVMod scores, the DOPE score and 
profile, and the GA341 score.
ModLoop (http://salilab.org/modloop/; Fiser and Sali, 2003b) takes as input a protein 
structure and one or more residue ranges. It then applies MODELLER’s loop modeling 
protocol to the selected residues to generate a set of candidate “loop” models, and returns 
the single model with the best-scoring loop conformation. The server can be particularly 
helpful for regions of the structure that have no templates. For example, in the TvLDH 
model, residues 94 to 102 do not align with the template (Fig. 5.6.8), and while 
MODELLER generates a stereochemically reasonable structure in this region, its 
conformation is unlikely to be close to native. The MODELLER model generated earlier 
Webb and Sali
Page 9
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
( TvLDH.B99990002.pdb) can thus be uploaded to ModLoop and 94::102:: given as the 
loop segments, to generate loop models. The resulting models can then be evaluated with the 
same Python scripts that were used to evaluate the MODELLER models, or with the 
ModEval server.
The AllosMod Web server (http://salilab.org/allosmod/; Weinkam et al., 2012) predicts 
conformational differences that may occur in the native ensemble in solution, such as those 
representing allosteric conformational transitions. The input is one or more macromolecular 
coordinate files (including DNA, RNA, and sugar molecules) and the corresponding 
sequence(s). The output is a set of molecular dynamics trajectories based on a simplified 
energy landscape. Biased energy landscapes result in efficient molecular dynamics sampling 
at constant temperatures, thereby providing a more ergodic sampling of the conformational 
space than standard molecular dynamics simulations.
FoXS (http://salilab.org/foxs/; Schneidman-Duhovny et al., 2010) calculates a Small Angle 
X-ray Scattering (SAXS) profile for an uploaded protein structure and compares it with an 
experimental profile. SAXS is a common structural characterization technique that is 
performed with the protein sample in solution, and usually takes only a few seconds on a 
well-equipped synchrotron beamline (Hura et al., 2009). Models generated with 
MODELLER can thus be evaluated with FoXS if a SAXS profile is available, or even used 
in modeling a flexible or multi-modular protein or assembling a macromolecular complex 
from its subunits.
For a full list of other Web services, see http://salilab.org.
SUPPORT PROTOCOL: OBTAINING AND INSTALLING MODELLER
MODELLER is written in Fortran 90 and uses Python for its control language. All input 
scripts to MODELLER are, hence, Python scripts. While knowledge of Python is not 
necessary to run MODELLER, it can be useful in performing more advanced tasks. Pre-
compiled binaries for MODELLER can be downloaded from http://salilab.org/modeller.
Necessary Resources
Hardware
A computer running RedHat Linux (PC, Opteron, or EM64T/Xeon64 systems) 
or other version of Linux/Unix (x86/x86_64 Linux, AIX), Apple Mac OS X 
(10.6 or later), or Microsoft Windows (XP or later)
Software
An up-to-date Internet browser, such as Internet Explorer (http://
www.microsoft.com/ie); Chrome (https://www.google.com/chrome/); Firefox 
(http://www.mozilla.org/firefox); or Safari (http://www.apple.com/safari)
Webb and Sali
Page 10
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Installation
The steps involved in installing MODELLER on a computer depend on its operating system. 
The following procedure describes the steps for installing MODELLER on a generic x86 PC 
running any Unix/Linux operating system. The procedures for other operating systems differ 
slightly. Detailed instructions for installing MODELLER on machines running other 
operating systems can be found at http://salilab.org/modeller/release.html. In particular, 
installer packages are available for Windows, Mac, RedHat Linux, and Debian/Ubuntu 
Linux operating systems, and also for the Homebrew and Anaconda Python environments.
1.
Point browser to http://salilab.org/modeller/download_installation.html.
2.
On the page that appears, download the distribution by clicking on the link 
entitled “Other Linux/Unix” under “Available downloads… ”.
3.
A valid license key, distributed free of cost to academic users, is required 
to use MODELLER. To obtain a key, go to the URL http://salilab.org/
modeller/registration.html, fill in the simple form at the bottom of the 
page, and read and accept the license agreement. The key will be e-mailed 
to the address provided.
4.
Open a terminal or console and change to the directory containing the 
downloaded distribution. The distributed file is a compressed archive file 
called modeller-9.15.tar.gz.
5.
Unpack the downloaded file with the following commands:
gunzip modeller-9.15.tar.gz
tar -xvf modeller-9.15.tar
6.
The files needed for the installation can be found in a newly created 
directory called modeller-9.15. Move into that directory and start the 
installation with the following commands:
cd modeller-9.15
./Install
7.
The installation script will prompt the user with several questions and 
suggest default answers. To accept the default answers, press the Enter 
key. The various prompts are briefly discussed below:
a.
For the prompt below, choose the appropriate combination 
of the machine architecture and operating system. For this 
example, choose the default answer by pressing the Enter 
key.
The currently supported architectures are 
as follows:
1.
Linux x86 PC (e.g., RedHat, 
SuSe).
Webb and Sali
Page 11
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
2.
IBM AIX OS.
3.
x86_64 (Opteron/EM64T) box 
(Linux).
4.
Alternative Linux x86 PC binary 
(e.g., for FreeBSD).
Select the type of your computer from the 
list above [1]:
b.
For the prompt below, tell the installer where to install the 
MODELLER executables. The default choice will place it 
in the directory indicated, but any directory to which the 
user has write permissions may be specified.
Full directory name for the 
installed MODELLER9.15 [<YOUR-HOME-
DIRECTORY>/bin/modeller9.15]:
c.
For the prompt below, enter the MODELLER license key 
obtained in step 3.
KEY_MODELLER9v15, obtained from our 
academic license server at http://
salilab.org/modeller/
registration.html:
8.
The installer will now confirm the answers to the above prompts. Press 
Enter to begin the installation. The mod9.15 script installed in the 
chosen directory can now be used to invoke MODELLER. The installer 
will also provide information on how to set up MODELLER to work with 
your operating system’s copy of Python.
Other resources
9
The MODELLER Web site provides links to several additional resources that 
can supplement the tutorial provided in this unit, as follows.
a.
News about the latest MODELLER releases can be found at 
http://salilab.org/modeller/news.html.
b.
There is a discussion forum, operated through a mailing list, 
devoted to providing tips, tricks, and practical help in using 
MODELLER. Users can subscribe to the mailing list at http://
salilab.org/modeller/discussion_forum.html. Users can also 
browse through or search the archived messages of the mailing 
list.
c.
The documentation section of the Web page contains links to 
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ; http://salilab.org/modeller/
FAQ.html), tutorial examples (http://salilab.org/modeller/
Webb and Sali
Page 12
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
tutorial), an online version of the manual (http://salilab.org/
modeller/manual), and user-editable Wiki pages (http://
salilab.org/modeller/wiki/) to exchange tips, scripts, and 
examples.
COMMENTARY
Background Information
As stated earlier, comparative modeling consists of four main steps: fold assignment, target-
template alignment, model building, and model evaluation (Marti-Renom et al., 2000; Fig. 
5.6.1).
Fold assignment and target-template alignment—Although fold assignment and 
sequence-structure alignment are logically two distinct steps in the process of comparative 
modeling, in practice, almost all fold-assignment methods also provide sequence-structure 
alignments. In the past, fold-assignment methods were optimized for better sensitivity in 
detecting remotely related homologs, often at the cost of alignment accuracy. However, 
recent methods simultaneously optimize both the sensitivity and alignment accuracy. 
Therefore, in the following discussion, fold assignment and sequence-structure alignment 
will be treated as a single procedure, explaining the differences as needed.
Fold assignment: The primary requirement for comparative modeling is the identification 
of one or more known template structures with detectable similarity to the target sequence. 
The identification of suitable templates is achieved by scanning structure databases, such as 
PDB (Berman et al., 2000), SCOP (Andreeva et al., 2004), DALI [UNIT 5.5 (Holm et al., 
2006); also see Dietmann et al. (2001)], and CATH (Pearl et al., 2005), with the target 
sequence as the query. The detected similarity is usually quantified in terms of sequence 
identity or statistical measures such as E-value or z-score, depending on the method used.
Three regimes of the sequence-structure relationship: The sequence-structure 
relationship can be subdivided into three different regimes in the sequence similarity 
spectrum: (i) the easily detected relationships, characterized by >30% sequence identity; (ii) 
the “twilight zone” (Rost, 1999), corresponding to relationships with statistically significant 
sequence similarity, with identities in the 10% to 30% range; and (iii) the “midnight zone” 
(Rost, 1999), corresponding to statistically insignificant sequence similarity.
Pairwise sequence alignment methods: For closely related protein sequences with 
identities higher than 30% to 40%, the alignments produced by all methods are almost 
always largely correct. The quickest way to search for suitable templates in this regime is to 
use simple pairwise sequence alignment methods such as SSEARCH (Pearson, 1994), 
BLAST (Altschul et al., 1997), and FASTA (Pearson, 1994). Brenner et al. (1998) showed 
that these methods detect only ~18% of the homologous pairs at less than 40% sequence 
identity, while they identify more than 90% of the relationships when sequence identity is 
between 30% and 40% (Brenner et al., 1998). Another benchmark, based on 200 reference 
structural alignments with 0% to 40% sequence identity, indicated that BLAST is able to 
correctly align only 26% of the residue positions (Sauder et al., 2000).
Webb and Sali
Page 13
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Profile-sequence alignment methods: The sensitivity of the search and accuracy of the 
alignment become progressively difficult as the relationships move into the twilight zone 
(Saqi et al., 1998; Rost, 1999). A significant improvement in this area was the introduction 
of profile methods by (Gribskov et al., 1987). The profile of a sequence is derived from a 
multiple sequence alignment and specifies residue-type occurrences for each alignment 
position. The information in a multiple sequence alignment is most often encoded as either a 
position-specific scoring matrix (PSSM; Henikoff and Henikoff, 1994; Altschul et al., 1997) 
or as a Hidden Markov Model (HMM; Krogh et al., 1994; Eddy, 1998). In order to identify 
suitable templates for comparative modeling, the profile of the target sequence is used to 
search against a database of template sequences. The profile-sequence methods are more 
sensitive in detecting related structures in the twilight zone than the pairwise sequence-based 
methods; they detect approximately twice the number of homologs under 40% sequence 
identity (Park et al., 1998; Lindahl and Elofsson, 2000; Sauder et al., 2000). The resulting 
profile-sequence alignments correctly align approximately 43% to 48% of residues in the 
0% to 40% sequence identity range (Sauder et al., 2000; Marti-Renom et al., 2004); this 
number is almost twice as large as that of the pairwise sequence methods. Frequently used 
programs for profile-sequence alignment are PSI-BLAST (Altschul et al., 1997), SAM 
(Karplus et al., 1998), HMMER (Eddy, 1998), HHsearch (Soding, 2005), HHBlits (Remmert 
et al., 2012), and BUILD_PROFILE (part of MODELLER; Sali and Blundell, 1993).
Profile-profile alignment methods: As a natural extension, the profile-sequence alignment 
methods have led to profile-profile alignment methods that search for suitable template 
structures by scanning the profile of the target sequence against a database of template 
profiles as opposed to a database of template sequences. These methods have proven to 
include the most sensitive and accurate fold assignment and alignment protocols to date 
(Edgar and Sjolander, 2004; Marti-Renom et al., 2004; Ohlson et al., 2004; Wang and 
Dunbrack, 2004). Profile-profile methods detect ~28% more relationships at the superfamily 
level and improve the alignment accuracy for 15% to 20%, compared to profile-sequence 
methods (Marti-Renom et al., 2004; Zhou and Zhou, 2005). There are a number of variants 
of profile-profile alignment methods that differ in the scoring functions they use 
(Pietrokovski, 1996; Rychlewski et al., 1998; Yona and Levitt, 2002; Panchenko, 2003; 
Sadreyev and Grishin, 2003; von Ohsen et al., 2003; Edgar, 2004; Marti-Renom et al., 2004; 
Zhou and Zhou, 2005). However, several analyses have shown that the overall performances 
of these methods are comparable (Edgar and Sjolander, 2004; Marti-Renom et al., 2004; 
Ohlson et al., 2004; Wang and Dunbrack, 2004). Some of the programs that can be used to 
detect suitable templates are FFAS (Jaroszewski et al., 2005), SP3 (Zhou and Zhou, 2005), 
SALIGN (Marti-Renom et al., 2004), HHBlits (Remmert et al., 2012), HHsearch (Soding, 
2005), and PPSCAN, part of MODELLER (Sali and Blundell, 1993).
Sequence-structure threading methods: As the sequence identity drops below the 
threshold of the twilight zone, there is usually insufficient signal in the sequences or their 
profiles for the sequence-based methods discussed above to detect true relationships 
(Lindahl and Elofsson, 2000). Sequence-structure threading methods are most useful in this 
regime, as they can sometimes recognize common folds even in the absence of any 
statistically significant sequence similarity (Godzik, 2003). These methods achieve higher 
Webb and Sali
Page 14
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
sensitivity by using structural information derived from the templates. The accuracy of a 
sequence-structure match is assessed by the score of a corresponding coarse model and not 
by sequence similarity, as in sequence-comparison methods (Godzik, 2003). The scoring 
scheme used to evaluate the accuracy is either based on residue substitution tables dependent 
on structural features such as solvent exposure, secondary structure type, and hydrogen-
bonding properties (Shi et al., 2001; Karchin et al., 2003; McGuffin and Jones, 2003; Zhou 
and Zhou, 2005) or on statistical potentials for residue interactions implied by the alignment 
(Sippl, 1990; Bowie et al., 1991; Sippl, 1995; Skolnick and Kihara, 2001; Xu et al., 2003). 
The use of structural data does not have to be restricted to the structure side of the aligned 
sequence-structure pair. For example, SAM-T08 makes use of the predicted local structure 
for the target sequence to enhance homolog detection and alignment accuracy (Karplus et 
al., 2003). Commonly used threading programs are GenTHREADER (Jones, 1999; 
McGuffin and Jones, 2003), 3D-PSSM (Kelley et al., 2000), FUGUE (Shi et al., 2001), SP3 
(Zhou and Zhou, 2005), SAM-T08 multi-track HMM (Karchin et al., 2003; Karplus et al., 
2003), and MUSTER (Wu and Zhang, 2008).
Iterative sequence-structure alignment and model building: Yet another strategy is to 
optimize the alignment by iterating over the process of calculating alignments, building 
models, and evaluating models. Such a protocol can sample alignments that are not 
statistically significant and identify the alignment that yields the best model. Although this 
procedure can be time consuming, it can significantly improve the accuracy of the resulting 
comparative models in difficult cases (John and Sali, 2003).
Importance of an accurate alignment: Regardless of the method used, searching in the 
twilight and midnight zones of the sequence-structure relationship often results in false 
negatives, false positives, or alignments that contain an increasingly large number of gaps 
and alignment errors. Improving the performance and accuracy of methods in this regime 
remains one of the main tasks of comparative modeling today (Moult, 2005). It is imperative 
to calculate an accurate alignment between the target-template pair, as comparative 
modeling can almost never recover from an alignment error (Sanchez and Sali, 1997a).
Template selection: After a list of all related protein structures and their alignments with the 
target sequence have been obtained, template structures are prioritized depending on the 
purpose of the comparative model. Template structures may be chosen based purely on the 
target-template sequence identity, or on a combination of several other criteria, such as 
experimental accuracy of the structures (resolution of X-ray structures, number of restraints 
per residue for NMR structures), conservation of active-site residues, holo-structures that 
have bound ligands of interest, and prior biological information that pertains to the solvent, 
pH, and quaternary contacts. It is not necessary to select only one template. In fact, the use 
of several templates approximately equidistant from the target sequence generally increases 
the model accuracy (Srinivasan and Blundell, 1993; Sanchez and Sali, 1997b).
Model building
Modeling by assembly of rigid bodies: The first and still widely used approach in 
comparative modeling is to assemble a model from a small number of rigid bodies obtained 
Webb and Sali
Page 15
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
from the aligned protein structures (Browne et al., 1969; Greer, 1981; Blundell et al., 1987). 
The approach is based on the natural dissection of the protein structures into conserved core 
regions, variable loops that connect them, and side chains that decorate the backbone. For 
example, the following semiautomated procedure is implemented in the computer program 
COMPOSER (Sutcliffe et al., 1987). First, the template structures are selected and 
superposed. Second, the “framework” is calculated by averaging the coordinates of the Cα 
atoms of structurally conserved regions in the template structures. Third, the main-chain 
atoms of each core region in the target model are obtained by superposing the core segment, 
from the template whose sequence is closest to the target, on the framework. Fourth, the 
loops are generated by scanning a database of all known protein structures to identify the 
structurally variable regions that fit the anchor core regions and have a compatible sequence 
(Topham et al., 1993). Fifth, the side chains are modeled based on their intrinsic 
conformational preferences and on the conformation of the equivalent side chains in the 
template structures (Sutcliffe et al., 1987). Finally, the stereochemistry of the model is 
improved either by a restrained energy minimization or a molecular dynamics refinement. 
The accuracy of a model can be somewhat increased when more than one template structure 
is used to construct the framework and when the templates are averaged into the framework 
using weights corresponding to their sequence similarities to the target sequence (Srinivasan 
and Blundell, 1993). Possible future improvements of modeling by rigid-body assembly 
include incorporation of rigid body shifts, such as the relative shifts in the packing of a 
helices and β-sheets (Nagarajaram et al., 1999). Three other programs that implement this 
method are 3D-JIGSAW (Bates et al., 2001), RosettaCM (Song et al., 2013), and SWISS-
MODEL (Schwede et al., 2003).
Modeling by segment matching or coordinate reconstruction: The basis of modeling by 
coordinate reconstruction is the finding that most hexapeptide segments of protein structure 
can be clustered into only 100 structurally different classes (Jones and Thirup, 1986; 
Claessens et al., 1989; Unger et al., 1989; Levitt, 1992; Bystroff and Baker, 1998). Thus, 
comparative models can be constructed by using a subset of atomic positions from template 
structures as guiding positions to identify and assemble short, all-atom segments that fit 
these guiding positions. The guiding positions usually correspond to the Cα atoms of the 
segments that are conserved in the alignment between the template structure and the target 
sequence. The all-atom segments that fit the guiding positions can be obtained either by 
scanning all known protein structures, including those that are not related to the sequence 
being modeled (Claessens et al., 1989; Holm and Sander, 1991), or by a conformational 
search restrained by an energy function (Bruccoleri and Karplus, 1987; van Gelder et al., 
1994). This method can construct both main-chain and side-chain atoms, and can also model 
unaligned regions (gaps). It is implemented in the program SegMod (Levitt, 1992). Even 
some side-chain modeling methods (Chinea et al., 1995) and the class of loop-construction 
methods based on finding suitable fragments in the database of known structures (Jones and 
Thirup, 1986) can be seen as segment-matching or coordinate-reconstruction methods.
Modeling by satisfaction of spatial restraints: The methods in this class begin by 
generating many constraints or restraints on the structure of the target sequence, using its 
alignment to related protein structures as a guide. The procedure is conceptually similar to 
Webb and Sali
Page 16
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
that used in determination of protein structures from NMR-derived restraints. The restraints 
are generally obtained by assuming that the corresponding distances between aligned 
residues in the template and the target structures are similar. These homology-derived 
restraints are usually supplemented by stereochemical restraints on bond lengths, bond 
angles, dihedral angles, and nonbonded atom-atom contacts that are obtained from a 
molecular mechanics force field. The model is then derived by minimizing the violations of 
all the restraints. This optimization can be achieved either by distance geometry or real-
space optimization. For example, an elegant distance geometry approach constructs all-atom 
models from lower and upper bounds on distances and dihedral angles (Havel and Snow, 
1991).
Comparative protein structure modeling by MODELLER: MODELLER, the authors’ own 
program for comparative modeling, belongs to this group of methods (Sali and Blundell, 
1993; Sali and Overington, 1994; Fiser et al., 2000; Fiser et al., 2002). MODELLER 
implements comparative protein structure modeling by satisfaction of spatial restraints. The 
program was designed to use as many different types of information about the target 
sequence as possible.
Homology-derived restraints: In the first step of model building, distance and dihedral angle 
restraints on the target sequence are derived from its alignment with template 3-D structures. 
The form of these restraints was obtained from a statistical analysis of the relationships 
between similar protein structures. The analysis relied on a database of 105 family 
alignments that included 416 proteins of known 3-D structure (Sali and Overington, 1994). 
By scanning the database of alignments, tables quantifying various correlations were 
obtained, such as the correlations between two equivalent Cα-Cα distances, or between 
equivalent main-chain dihedral angles from two related proteins (Sali and Blundell, 1993). 
These relationships are expressed as conditional probability density functions (pdf’s), and 
can be used directly as spatial restraints. For example, probabilities for different values of 
the main-chain dihedral angles are calculated from the type of residue considered, from 
main-chain conformation of an equivalent residue, and from sequence similarity between the 
two proteins. Another example is the pdf for a certain Cα-Cα distance given equivalent 
distances in two related protein structures. An important feature of the method is that the 
form of spatial restraints was obtained empirically, from a database of protein structure 
alignments.
Stereochemical restraints: In the second step, the spatial restraints and the CHARMM22 
force field terms enforcing proper stereochemistry (MacKerell et al., 1998) are combined 
into an objective function. The general form of the objective function is similar to that in 
molecular dynamics programs, such as CHARMM22 (MacKerell et al., 1998). The objective 
function depends on the Cartesian coordinates of ~10,000 atoms (3-D points) that form the 
modeled molecules. For a 10,000-atom system, there can be on the order of 200,000 
restraints. The functional form of each term is simple; it includes a quadratic function, 
harmonic lower and upper bounds, cosine, a weighted sum of a few Gaussian functions, 
Coulomb law, Lennard-Jones potential, and cubic splines. The geometric features presently 
include a distance, an angle, a dihedral angle, a pair of dihedral angles between two, three, 
Webb and Sali
Page 17
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
four, and eight atoms, respectively, the shortest distance in the set of distances, solvent 
accessibility, and atom density expressed as the number of atoms around the central atom. 
Some restraints can be used to restrain pseudo-atoms, e.g., the gravity center of several 
atoms.
Optimization of the objective function: Finally, the model is obtained by optimizing the 
objective function in Cartesian space. The optimization is carried out by the use of the 
variable target function method (Braun and Go, 1985), employing methods of conjugate 
gradients and molecular dynamics with simulated annealing (Clore et al., 1986). Several 
slightly different models can be calculated by varying the initial structure, and the variability 
among these models can be used to estimate the lower bound on the errors in the 
corresponding regions of the fold.
Restraints derived from experimental data: Because modeling by satisfaction of spatial 
restraints can use many different types of information about the target sequence, it is perhaps 
the most promising of all comparative modeling techniques. One of the strengths of 
modeling by satisfaction of spatial restraints is that restraints derived from a number of 
different sources can easily be added to the homology-derived restraints. For example, 
restraints could be provided by rules for secondary-structure packing (Cohen et al., 1989), 
analyses of hydrophobicity (Aszodi and Taylor, 1994) and correlated mutations (Taylor et 
al., 1994), empirical potentials of mean force (Sippl, 1990), nuclear magnetic resonance 
(NMR) experiments (Sutcliffe et al., 1992), cross-linking experiments, fluorescence 
spectroscopy, image reconstruction in electron microscopy, site-directed mutagenesis 
(Boissel et al., 1993), and intuition, among other sources. Especially in difficult cases, a 
comparative model could be improved by making it consistent with available experimental 
data and/or with more general knowledge about protein structure.
Relative accuracy, flexibility, and automation: Accuracies of the various model-building 
methods are relatively similar when used optimally (Marti-Renom et al., 2002). Other 
factors such as template selection and alignment accuracy usually have a larger impact on 
the model accuracy, especially for models based on low sequence identity to the templates. 
However, it is important that a modeling method allow a degree of flexibility and automation 
to obtain better models more easily and rapidly. For example, a method should allow for an 
easy recalculation of a model when a change is made in the alignment. It should also be 
straightforward enough to calculate models based on several templates, and should provide 
tools for incorporation of prior knowledge about the target (e.g., cross-linking restraints, 
predicted secondary structure) and allow ab initio modeling of insertions (e.g., loops), which 
can be crucial for annotation of function.
Loop modeling: Loop modeling is an especially important aspect of comparative modeling 
in the range from 30% to 50% sequence identity. In this range of overall similarity, loops 
among the homologs vary while the core regions are still relatively conserved and accurately 
aligned. Loops often play an important role in defining the functional specificity of a given 
protein, forming the active and binding sites. Loop modeling can be seen as a mini protein-
folding problem, because the correct conformation of a given segment of a polypeptide 
Webb and Sali
Page 18
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
chain has to be calculated mainly from the sequence of the segment itself. However, loops 
are generally too short to provide sufficient information about their local fold. Even identical 
decapeptides in different proteins do not always have the same conformation (Kabsch and 
Sander, 1984; Mezei, 1998). Some additional restraints are provided by the core anchor 
regions that span the loop and by the structure of the rest of the protein that cradles the loop. 
Although many loop-modeling methods have been described, it is still challenging to 
correctly and confidently model loops longer than ~10 to 12 residues (Fiser et al., 2000; 
Jacobson et al., 2004; Zhu et al., 2006).
There are two main classes of loop-modeling methods: (i) database search approaches that 
scan a database of all known protein structures to find segments fitting the anchor core 
regions (Jones and Thirup, 1986; Chothia and Lesk, 1987); (ii) conformational search 
approaches that rely on optimizing a scoring function (Moult and James, 1986; Bruccoleri 
and Karplus, 1987; Shenkin et al., 1987). There are also methods that combine these two 
approaches (van Vlijmen and Karplus, 1997; Deane and Blundell, 2001).
Loop modeling by database search: The database search approach to loop modeling is 
accurate and efficient when a database of specific loops is created to address the modeling of 
the same class of loops, such as β-hairpins (Sibanda et al., 1989), or loops on a specific fold, 
such as the hypervariable regions in the immunoglobulin fold (Chothia and Lesk, 1987; 
Chothia et al., 1989). There are attempts to classify loop conformations into more general 
categories, thus extending the applicability of the database search approach (Ring et al., 
1992; Oliva et al., 1997; Rufino et al., 1997; Fernandez-Fuentes and Fiser, 2006). However, 
the database methods are limited because the number of possible conformations increases 
exponentially with the length of a loop, and until the late 1990s only loops up to 7 residues 
long could be modeled using the database of known protein structures (Fidelis et al., 1994; 
Lessel and Schomburg, 1994). However, the growth of the PDB in recent years has largely 
eliminated this problem (Fernandez-Fuentes and Fiser, 2006).
Loop modeling by conformational search: There are many such methods, exploiting 
different protein representations, objective functions, and optimization or enumeration 
algorithms. The search algorithms include the minimum perturbation method (Fine et al., 
1986), dihedral angle search through a rotamer library (Zhu et al., 2006; Sellers et al., 2008), 
molecular dynamics simulations (Bruccoleri and Karplus, 1990; van Vlijmen and Karplus, 
1997), genetic algorithms (Ring et al., 1993), Monte Carlo and simulated annealing (Higo et 
al., 1992; Collura et al., 1993; Abagyan and Totrov, 1994), multiple copy simultaneous 
search (Zheng et al., 1993), self-consistent field optimization (Koehl and Delarue, 1995), 
robotics-inspired kinematic closure (Mandell et al., 2009), and enumeration based on graph 
theory (Samudrala and Moult, 1998). The accuracy of loop predictions can be further 
improved by clustering the sampled loop conformations and partially accounting for the 
entropic contribution to the free energy (Xiang et al., 2002). Another way to improve the 
accuracy of loop predictions is to consider the solvent effects. Improvements in implicit 
solvation models, such as the Generalized Born solvation model, motivated their use in loop 
modeling. The solvent contribution to the free energy can be added to the scoring function 
for optimization, or it can be used to rank the sampled loop conformations after they are 
Webb and Sali
Page 19
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
generated with a scoring function that does not include the solvent terms (Fiser et al., 2000; 
Felts et al., 2002; de Bakker et al., 2003; DePristo et al., 2003).
Loop modeling in MODELLER: The loop-modeling module in MODELLER implements 
the optimization-based approach (Fiser et al., 2000; Fiser and Sali, 2003b). The main 
reasons for choosing this implementation are the generality and conceptual simplicity of 
scoring function minimization. Loop prediction by optimization is applicable to 
simultaneous modeling of several loops and loops interacting with ligands, which is not 
straightforward with the database-search approaches. Loop optimization in MODELLER 
relies on conjugate gradients and molecular dynamics with simulated annealing. The pseudo 
energy function is a sum of many terms, including some terms from the CHARMM22 
molecular mechanics force field (MacKerell et al., 1998), spatial restraints based on 
distributions of distances (Sippl, 1990; Melo et al., 2002), and dihedral angles in known 
protein structures. The method was tested on a large number of loops of known structure, 
both in native and near-native environments (Fiser et al., 2000).
Comparative model building by iterative alignment, model building, and model 
assessment: Comparative or homology protein structure modeling is severely limited by 
errors in the alignment of a modeled sequence with related proteins of known three-
dimensional structure. To ameliorate this problem, one can use an iterative method that 
optimizes both the alignment and the model implied by it (Sanchez and Sali, 1997a; Miwa et 
al., 1999). This task can be achieved by a genetic algorithm protocol that starts with a set of 
initial alignments and then iterates through realignment, model building, and model 
assessment to optimize a model assessment score (John and Sali, 2003). During this iterative 
process: (1) new alignments are constructed by the application of a number of genetic 
algorithm operators, such as alignment mutations and cross-overs; (2) comparative models 
corresponding to these alignments are built by satisfaction of spatial restraints, as 
implemented in the program MODELLER; and (3) the models are assessed by a composite 
score, partly depending on an atomic statistical potential (Melo et al., 2002). When testing 
the procedure on a very difficult set of 19 modeling targets sharing only 4% to 27% 
sequence identity with their template structures, the average final alignment accuracy 
increased from 37% to 45% relative to the initial alignment (the alignment accuracy was 
measured as the percentage of positions in the tested alignment that were identical to the 
reference structure-based alignment). Correspondingly, the average model accuracy 
increased from 43% to 54% (the model accuracy was measured as the percentage of the Cα 
atoms of the model that were within 5 Å of the corresponding Cα atoms in the superimposed 
native structure).
Errors in comparative models: As the similarity between the target and the templates 
decreases, the errors in the model increase. Errors in comparative models can be divided into 
five categories (Sanchez and Sali, 1997a, 1997b; Fig. 5.6.14), as follows:
Errors in side-chain packing (Fig. 5.6.14A): As the sequences diverge, the packing of side-
chains in the protein core changes. Sometimes even the conformation of identical side chains 
is not conserved, a pitfall for many comparative modeling methods. Side-chain errors are 
Webb and Sali
Page 20
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
critical if they occur in regions that are involved in protein function, such as active sites and 
ligand-binding sites.
Distortions and shifts in correctly aligned regions (Fig. 5.6.14B): As a consequence of 
sequence divergence, the main-chain conformation changes, even if the overall fold remains 
the same. Therefore, it is possible that in some correctly aligned segments of a model, the 
template is locally different (>3 Å) from the target, resulting in errors in that region. The 
structural differences are sometimes not due to differences in sequence, but are a 
consequence of artifacts in structure determination or structure determination in different 
environments (e.g., packing of subunits in a crystal). The simultaneous use of several 
templates can minimize this kind of error (Srinivasan and Blundell, 1993; Sanchez and Sali, 
1997a, 1997b).
Errors in regions without a template (Fig. 5.6.14C): Segments of the target sequence that 
have no equivalent region in the template structure (i.e., insertions or loops) are the most 
difficult regions to model. If the insertion is relatively short, <9 residues long, some methods 
can correctly predict the conformation of the backbone (van Vlijmen and Karplus, 1997; 
Fiser et al., 2000; Jacobson et al., 2004). Conditions for successful prediction are the correct 
alignment and an accurately modeled environment surrounding the insertion.
Errors due to misalignments (Fig. 5.6.14D): The largest single source of errors in 
comparative modeling is misalignments, especially when the target-template sequence 
identity decreases below 30%. However, alignment errors can be minimized in two ways. 
First, it is usually possible to use a large number of sequences to construct a multiple 
alignment, even if most of these sequences do not have known structures. Multiple 
alignments are generally more reliable than pairwise alignments (Barton and Sternberg, 
1987; Taylor et al., 1994). The second way of improving the alignment is to iteratively 
modify those regions in the alignment that correspond to predicted errors in the model 
(Sanchez and Sali, 1997a, 1997b; John and Sali, 2003).
Incorrect templates (Fig. 5.6.14E): This is a potential problem when distantly related 
proteins are used as templates (i.e., < 25% sequence identity). Distinguishing between a 
model based on an incorrect template and a model based on an incorrect alignment with a 
correct template is difficult. In both cases, the evaluation methods will predict an unreliable 
model. The conservation of the key functional or structural residues in the target sequence 
increases the confidence in a given fold assignment.
Predicting the model accuracy: The accuracy of the predicted model determines the 
information that can be extracted from it. Thus, estimating the accuracy of a model in the 
absence of the known structure is essential for interpreting it.
Initial assessment of the fold: As discussed earlier, a model calculated using a template 
structure that shares more than 30% sequence identity is indicative of an overall accurate 
structure. However, when the sequence identity is lower, the first aspect of model evaluation 
is to confirm whether or not a correct template was used for modeling. It is often the case, 
when operating in this regime, that the fold-assignment step produces only false positives. A 
Webb and Sali
Page 21
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
further complication is that at such low similarities the alignment generally contains many 
errors, making it difficult to distinguish between an incorrect template on one hand and an 
incorrect alignment with a correct template on the other hand. There are several methods 
that use 3-D profiles and statistical potentials (Sippl, 1990; Luthy et al., 1992; Melo et al., 
2002) to assess the compatibility between the sequence and modeled structure by evaluating 
the environment of each residue in a model with respect to the expected environment as 
found in native high-resolution experimental structures. These methods can be used to assess 
whether or not the correct template was used for the modeling. They include VERIFY3D 
(Luthy et al., 1992), Prosa, 2003 (Sippl, 1993; Wiederstein and Sippl, 2007), HARMONY 
(Topham et al., 1994), ANOLEA (Melo and Feytmans, 1998), DFIRE (Zhou and Zhou, 
2002), DOPE (Shen and Sali, 2006), SOAP (Dong et al., 2013), QMEAN local (Benkert et 
al., 2011), and TSVMod (Eramian et al., 2008).
Even when the model is based on alignments that have >30% sequence identity, other 
factors, including the environment, can strongly influence the accuracy of a model. For 
instance, some calcium-binding proteins undergo large conformational changes when bound 
to calcium. If a calcium-free template is used to model the calcium-bound state of the target, 
it is likely that the model will be incorrect irrespective of the target-template similarity or 
accuracy of the template structure (Pawlowski et al., 1996).
Evaluations of self-consistency: The model should also be subjected to evaluations of self-
consistency to ensure that it satisfies the restraints used to calculate it. Additionally, the 
stereochemistry of the model (e.g., bond-lengths, bond-angles, backbone torsion angles, and 
nonbonded contacts) may be evaluated using programs such as PROCHECK (Laskowski et 
al., 1993) and WHATCHECK (Hooft et al., 1996). Although errors in stereochemistry are 
rare and less informative than errors detected by statistical potentials, a cluster of 
stereochemical errors may indicate that there are larger errors (e.g., alignment errors) in that 
region.
Applications—To maximize the impact of comparative models, the modeling process used 
to generate them should be clearly described, for example by publishing or identifying a 
protocol similar to that described here. This protocol should also include assessment using 
the best computational tools currently available, such as the model assessment methods 
covered in this text, and those cataloged at the Protein Model Portal (http://
proteinmodelportal.org; Arnold et al., 2009; Haas et al., 2013). Finally, the study should both 
rationalize existing experimental data and make testable predictions. For example, 
comparative models can be helpful in designing mutants to test hypotheses about the 
protein’s function (Wu et al., 1999; Vernal et al., 2002); in identifying active and binding 
sites (Sheng et al., 1996); in searching for, designing, and improving ligand binding strength 
for a given binding site (Ring et al., 1993; Li et al., 1996; Selzer et al., 1997; Enyedy et al., 
2001; Que et al., 2002); modeling substrate specificity (Xu et al., 1996); in predicting 
antigenic epitopes (Sali and Blundell, 1993); in simulating protein-protein docking (Vakser, 
1995); in inferring function from calculated electrostatic potential around the protein 
(Matsumoto et al., 1995); in facilitating molecular replacement in X-ray structure 
determination (Howell et al., 1992); in refining models based on NMR constraints (Modi et 
Webb and Sali
Page 22
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
al., 1996); in testing and improving a sequence-structure alignment (Wolf et al., 1998); in 
annotating single nucleotide polymorphisms (Mirkovic et al., 2004; Karchin et al., 2005); in 
structural characterization of large complexes by docking to low-resolution cryo-electron 
density maps (Spahn et al., 2001; Gao et al., 2003); and in rationalizing known experimental 
observations.
Fortunately, a 3-D model does not have to be absolutely perfect to be helpful in biology, as 
demonstrated by the applications listed above. The type of a question that can be addressed 
with a particular model does depend on its accuracy (Fig. 5.6.15).
At the low end of the accuracy spectrum, there are models that are based on less than 25% 
sequence identity and that sometimes have less than 50% of their Cα atoms within 3.5 Å of 
their correct positions. However, such models may still have the correct fold, and even 
knowing only the fold of a protein may sometimes be sufficient to predict its approximate 
biochemical function. Models in this low range of accuracy, combined with model 
evaluation, can be used for confirming or rejecting a match between remotely related 
proteins (Sanchez and Sali, 1997a, 1998).
In the middle of the accuracy spectrum are the models based on approximately 35% 
sequence identity, corresponding to 85% of the Cα atoms modeled within 3.5 Å of their 
correct positions. Fortunately, the active and binding sites are frequently more conserved 
than the rest of the fold, and are thus modeled more accurately (Sanchez and Sali, 1998). In 
general, medium-resolution models frequently allow a refinement of the functional 
prediction based on sequence alone, because ligand binding is most directly determined by 
the structure of the binding site rather than its sequence. It is frequently possible to correctly 
predict important features of the target protein that do not occur in the template structure. 
For example, the location of a binding site can be predicted from clusters of charged 
residues (Matsumoto et al., 1995), and the size of a ligand may be predicted from the 
volume of the binding-site cleft (Xu et al., 1996). Medium-resolution models can also be 
used to construct site-directed mutants with altered or destroyed binding capacity, which in 
turn could test hypotheses about the sequence-structure-function relationships. Other 
problems that can be addressed with medium-resolution comparative models include 
designing proteins that have compact structures, without long tails, loops, and exposed 
hydrophobic residues, for better crystallization, or designing proteins with added disulfide 
bonds for extra stability.
The high end of the accuracy spectrum corresponds to models based on 50% sequence 
identity or more. The average accuracy of these models approaches that of low-resolution X-
ray structures (3 Å resolution) or medium-resolution NMR structures (10 distance restraints 
per residue; Sanchez and Sali, 1997b). The alignments on which these models are based 
generally contain almost no errors. Models with such high accuracy have been shown to be 
useful even for refining crystallographic structures by the method of molecular replacement 
(Howell et al., 1992; Baker and Sali, 2001; Jones, 2001; Claude et al., 2004; 
Schwarzenbacher et al., 2004).
Webb and Sali
Page 23
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
A good comparative modeling study tends to include novel experimental data, used in model 
derivation, assessment, and/or interpretation. In some instances, however, only models, 
rationalizations, and/or predictions, even without new experimental data, can be impactful, 
accelerating the cycle of science, consisting of data generation, interpretation, modeling, and 
hypothesizing.
Conclusion—Over the past few years, there has been a gradual increase in both the 
accuracy of comparative models and the fraction of protein sequences that can be modeled 
with useful accuracy (Marti-Renom et al., 2000; Baker and Sali, 2001; Pieper et al., 2014). 
The magnitude of errors in fold assignment, alignment, and the modeling of side-chains and 
loops have decreased considerably. These improvements are a consequence both of better 
techniques and a larger number of known protein sequences and structures. Nevertheless, all 
the errors remain significant and demand future methodological improvements. In addition, 
there is a great need for more accurate modeling of distortions and rigid-body shifts, as well 
as detection of errors in a given protein structure model. Error detection is useful both for 
refinement and interpretation of the models.
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to express gratitude to all members of their research group. This review is partially based on the 
authors’ previous reviews (Marti-Renom et al., 2000; Eswar et al., 2003; Fiser and Sali, 2003a; also see the previous 
versions of this unit at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/0471140864.ps0209s50/pdf. They wish to 
acknowledge funding from Sandler Family Supporting Foundation, NIH R01 GM54762, P01 GM71790, P01 
1AI091575, and U54 GM62529, as well as hardware gifts from IBM and Intel.
Literature Cited
Abagyan R, Totrov M. Biased probability Monte Carlo conformational searches and electrostatic 
calculations for peptides and proteins. J Mol Biol. 1994; 235:983–1002. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.
1994.1052 [PubMed: 8289329] 
Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W, Lipman DJ. Gapped BLAST and 
PSI-BLAST: A new generation of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997; 
25:3389–3402. DOI: 10.1093/nar/25.17.3389 [PubMed: 9254694] 
Andreeva A, Howorth D, Brenner SE, Hubbard TJ, Chothia C, Murzin AG. SCOP database in 2004: 
Refinements integrate structure and sequence family data. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004; 32:D226–
D229. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkh039 [PubMed: 14681400] 
Armougom F, Moretti S, Poirot O, Audic S, Dumas P, Schaeli B, Keduas V, Notredame C. Expresso: 
Automatic incorporation of structural information in multiple sequence alignments using 3D-
Coffee. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006; 34:W604–W608. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkl092 [PubMed: 16845081] 
Arnold K, Bordoli L, Kopp J, Schwede T. The SWISS-MODEL workspace: A web-based environment 
for protein structure homology modelling. Bioinformatics. 2006; 22:195–201. DOI: 10.1093/
bioinformatics/bti770 [PubMed: 16301204] 
Arnold K, Kiefer F, Kopp J, Battey JN, Podvinec M, Westbrook JD, Berman HM, Bordoli L, Schwede 
T. The protein model portal. J Struct Funct Genomics. 2009; 10:1–8. DOI: 10.1007/
s10969-008-9048-5 [PubMed: 19037750] 
Aszodi A, Taylor WR. Secondary structure formation in model polypeptide chains. Protein Eng. 1994; 
7:633–644. DOI: 10.1093/protein/7.5.633 [PubMed: 8073033] 
Attwood TK, Coletta A, Muirhead G, Pavlopoulou A, Philippou PB, Popov I, Roma-Mateo C, 
Theodosiou A, Mitchell AL. The PRINTS database: A fine-grained protein sequence annotation and 
analysis resource–its status in 2012. Database (Oxford). 2012; 2012:bas019.doi: 10.1093/database/
bas019 [PubMed: 22508994] 
Webb and Sali
Page 24
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Bailey TL, Elkan C. Fitting a mixture model by expectation maximization to discover motifs in 
biopolymers. Proc Int Conf Intell Syst Mol Biol. 1994; 2:28–36. [PubMed: 7584402] 
Bairoch A, Apweiler R, Wu CH, Barker WC, Boeckmann B, Ferro S, Gasteiger E, Huang H, Lopez R, 
Magrane M, Martin MJ, Natale DA, O’Donovan C, Redaschi N, Yeh LS. The Universal Protein 
Resource (UniProt). Nucleic Acids Res. 2005; 33:D154–D159. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gki070 
[PubMed: 15608167] 
Baker D, Sali A. Protein structure prediction and structural genomics. Science. 2001; 294:93–96. DOI: 
10.1126/science.1065659 [PubMed: 11588250] 
Barton GJ, Sternberg MJ. A strategy for the rapid multiple alignment of protein sequences. Confidence 
levels from tertiary structure comparisons. J Mol Biol. 1987; 198:327–337. DOI: 
10.1016/0022-2836(87)90316-0 [PubMed: 3430611] 
Bateman A, Coin L, Durbin R, Finn RD, Hollich V, Griffiths-Jones S, Khanna A, Marshall M, Moxon 
S, Sonnhammer EL, Studholme DJ, Yeats C, Eddy SR. The Pfam protein families database. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 2004; 32:D138–D141. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkh121 [PubMed: 14681378] 
Bates PA, Kelley LA, MacCallum RM, Sternberg MJ. Enhancement of protein modeling by human 
intervention in applying the automatic programs 3D-JIGSAW and 3D-PSSM. Proteins. 2001; 
(Suppl 5):39–46. DOI: 10.1002/prot.1168 [PubMed: 11835480] 
Benkert P, Biasini M, Schwede T. Toward the estimation of the absolute quality of individual protein 
structure models. Bioinformatics. 2011; 27:343–350. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq662 
[PubMed: 21134891] 
Benson DA, Cavanaugh M, Clark K, Karsch-Mizrachi I, Lipman DJ, Ostell J, Sayers EW. GenBank. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 2013; 41:D36–D42. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks1195 [PubMed: 23193287] 
Berman HM, Westbrook J, Feng Z, Gilliland G, Bhat TN, Weissig H, Shindyalov IN, Bourne PE. The 
Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000; 28:235–242. DOI: 10.1093/nar/28.1.235 [PubMed: 
10592235] 
Blundell TL, Sibanda BL, Sternberg MJ, Thornton JM. Knowledge-based prediction of protein 
structures and the design of novel molecules. Nature. 1987; 326:347–352. DOI: 10.1038/326347a0 
[PubMed: 3550471] 
Boissel JP, Lee WR, Presnell SR, Cohen FE, Bunn HF. Erythropoietin structure-function relationships. 
Mutant proteins that test a model of tertiary structure. J Biol Chem. 1993; 268:15983–15993. 
[PubMed: 8340419] 
Bowie JU, Luthy R, Eisenberg D. A method to identify protein sequences that fold into a known three-
dimensional structure. Science. 1991; 253:164–170. DOI: 10.1126/science.1853201 [PubMed: 
1853201] 
Braun W, Go N. Calculation of protein conformations by proton-proton distance constraints. A new 
efficient algorithm. J Mol Biol. 1985; 186:611–626. DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(85)90134-2 
[PubMed: 2419572] 
Brenner SE, Chothia C, Hubbard TJ. Assessing sequence comparison methods with reliable 
structurally identified distant evolutionary relationships. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1998; 95:6073–
6078. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.11.6073 [PubMed: 9600919] 
Brown SD, Babbitt PC. Inference of functional properties from large-scale analysis of enzyme 
superfamilies. J Biol Chem. 2012; 287:35–42. DOI: 10.1074/jbc.R111.283408 [PubMed: 
22069325] 
Browne WJ, North AC, Phillips DC, Brew K, Vanaman TC, Hill RL. A possible three-dimensional 
structure of bovine alpha-lactalbumin based on that of hen’s egg-white lysozyme. J Mol Biol. 
1969; 42:65–86. DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(69)90487-2 [PubMed: 5817651] 
Bru C, Courcelle E, Carrere S, Beausse Y, Dalmar S, Kahn D. The ProDom database of protein 
domain families: More emphasis on 3D. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005; 33:D212–D215. DOI: 
10.1093/nar/gki034 [PubMed: 15608179] 
Bruccoleri RE, Karplus M. Prediction of the folding of short polypeptide segments by uniform 
conformational sampling. Biopolymers. 1987; 26:137–168. DOI: 10.1002/bip.360260114 
[PubMed: 3801593] 
Bruccoleri RE, Karplus M. Conformational sampling using high-temperature molecular dynamics. 
Biopolymers. 1990; 29:1847–1862. DOI: 10.1002/bip.360291415 [PubMed: 2207289] 
Webb and Sali
Page 25
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Bystroff C, Baker D. Prediction of local structure in proteins using a library of sequence-structure 
motifs. J Mol Biol. 1998; 281:565–577. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1998.1943 [PubMed: 9698570] 
Chinea G, Padron G, Hooft RW, Sander C, Vriend G. The use of position-specific rotamers in model 
building by homology. Proteins. 1995; 23:415–421. DOI: 10.1002/prot.340230315 [PubMed: 
8710834] 
Chothia C, Lesk AM. Canonical structures for the hypervariable regions of immunoglobulins. J Mol 
Biol. 1987; 196:901–917. DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(87)90412-8 [PubMed: 3681981] 
Chothia C, Lesk AM, Tramontano A, Levitt M, Smith-Gill SJ, Air G, Sheriff S, Padlan EA, Davies D, 
Tulip WR, Colman PM, Spinelli S, Alzari PM, Poljak RJ. Conformations of immunoglobulin 
hypervariable regions. Nature. 1989; 342:877–883. DOI: 10.1038/342877a0 [PubMed: 2687698] 
Claessens M, Van Cutsem E, Lasters I, Wodak S. Modelling the polypeptide backbone with ‘spare 
parts’ from known protein structures. Protein Eng. 1989; 2:335–345. DOI: 10.1093/protein/2.5.335 
[PubMed: 2928296] 
Claude JB, Suhre K, Notredame C, Claverie JM, Abergel C. CaspR: A web server for automated 
molecular replacement using homology modelling. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004; 32:W606–W609. 
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkh400 [PubMed: 15215460] 
Clore GM, Brunger AT, Karplus M, Gronenborn AM. Application of molecular dynamics with 
interproton distance restraints to three-dimensional protein structure determination. A model study 
of crambin. J Mol Biol. 1986; 191:523–551. DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(86)90146-4 [PubMed: 
3029386] 
Cohen FE, Gregoret L, Presnell SR, Kuntz ID. Protein structure predictions: New theoretical 
approaches. Prog Clin Biol Res. 1989; 289:75–85. [PubMed: 2657754] 
Collura V, Higo J, Garnier J. Modeling of protein loops by simulated annealing. Protein Sci. 1993; 
2:1502–1510. DOI: 10.1002/pro.5560020915 [PubMed: 8401234] 
Colovos C, Yeates TO. Verification of protein structures: Patterns of nonbonded atomic interactions. 
Protein Sci. 1993; 2:1511–1519. DOI: 10.1002/pro.5560020916 [PubMed: 8401235] 
de Bakker PI, DePristo MA, Burke DF, Blundell TL. Ab initio construction of polypeptide fragments: 
Accuracy of loop decoy discrimination by an all-atom statistical potential and the AMBER force 
field with the Generalized Born solvation model. Proteins. 2003; 51:21–40. DOI: 10.1002/prot.
10235 [PubMed: 12596261] 
Deane CM, Blundell TL. CODA: A combined algorithm for predicting the structurally variable regions 
of protein models. Protein Sci. 2001; 10:599–612. DOI: 10.1110/ps.37601 [PubMed: 11344328] 
DePristo MA, de Bakker PI, Lovell SC, Blundell TL. Ab initio construction of polypeptide fragments: 
Efficient generation of accurate, representative ensembles. Proteins. 2003; 51:41–55. DOI: 
10.1002/prot.10285 [PubMed: 12596262] 
Dietmann S, Park J, Notredame C, Heger A, Lappe M, Holm L. A fully automatic evolutionary 
classification of protein folds: Dali Domain Dictionary version 3. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001; 29:55–
57. DOI: 10.1093/nar/29.1.55 [PubMed: 11125048] 
Dong GQ, Fan H, Schneidman-Duhovny D, Webb B, Sali A. Optimized atomic statistical potentials: 
Assessment of protein interfaces and loops. Bioinformatics. 2013; 29:3158–3166. DOI: 10.1093/
bioinformatics/btt560 [PubMed: 24078704] 
Dror O, Benyamini H, Nussinov R, Wolfson H. MASS: Multiple structural alignment by secondary 
structures. Bioinformatics. 2003; 19(Suppl 1):i95–i104. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btg1012 
[PubMed: 12855444] 
Eddy SR. Profile hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics. 1998; 14:755–763. DOI: 10.1093/
bioinformatics/14.9.755 [PubMed: 9918945] 
Edgar RC. MUSCLE: Multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and high throughput. Nucleic 
Acids Res. 2004; 32:1792–1797. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkh340 [PubMed: 15034147] 
Edgar RC, Sjolander K. A comparison of scoring functions for protein sequence profile alignment. 
Bioinformatics. 2004; 20:1301–1308. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bth090 [PubMed: 14962936] 
Enyedy IJ, Lee SL, Kuo AH, Dickson RB, Lin CY, Wang S. Structure-based approach for the 
discovery of bis-benzamidines as novel inhibitors of matriptase. J Med Chem. 2001; 44:1349–
1355. DOI: 10.1021/jm000395x [PubMed: 11311057] 
Webb and Sali
Page 26
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Eramian D, Eswar N, Shen M, Sali A. How well can the accuracy of comparative protein structure 
models be predicted? Protein Sci. 2008; 17:1881–1893. DOI: 10.1110/ps.036061.108 [PubMed: 
18832340] 
Eswar N, John B, Mirkovic N, Fiser A, Ilyin VA, Pieper U, Stuart AC, Marti-Renom MA, 
Madhusudhan MS, Yerkovich B, Sali A. Tools for comparative protein structure modeling and 
analysis. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003; 31:3375–3380. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkg543 [PubMed: 
12824331] 
Felsenstein J. PHYLIP—Phylogeny Inference Package (Version 3.2). Cladistics. 1989; 5:164–166. 
DOI: 10.1111/j.1096-0031.1989.tb00562.x
Felts AK, Gallicchio E, Wallqvist A, Levy RM. Distinguishing native conformations of proteins from 
decoys with an effective free energy estimator based on the OPLS all-atom force field and the 
Surface Generalized Born solvent model. Proteins. 2002; 48:404–422. DOI: 10.1002/prot.10171 
[PubMed: 12112706] 
Fernandez-Fuentes N, Fiser A. Saturating representation of loop conformational fragments in structure 
databanks. BMC Struct Biol. 2006; 6:15.doi: 10.1186/1472-6807-6-15 [PubMed: 16820050] 
Fernandez-Fuentes N, Rai BK, Madrid-Aliste CJ, Fajardo JE, Fiser A. Comparative protein structure 
modeling by combining multiple templates and optimizing sequence-to-structure alignments. 
Bioinformatics. 2007; 23:2558–2565. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btm377 [PubMed: 17823132] 
Fidelis K, Stern PS, Bacon D, Moult J. Comparison of systematic search and database methods for 
constructing segments of protein structure. Protein Eng. 1994; 7:953–960. DOI: 10.1093/protein/
7.8.953 [PubMed: 7809034] 
Fine RM, Wang H, Shenkin PS, Yarmush DL, Levinthal C. Predicting antibody hypervariable loop 
conformations. II: Minimization and molecular dynamics studies of MCPC603 from many 
randomly generated loop conformations. Proteins. 1986; 1:342–362. DOI: 10.1002/prot.
340010408 [PubMed: 3449860] 
Fiser A. Protein structure modeling in the proteomics era. Expert Rev Proteomics. 2004; 1:97–110. 
DOI: 10.1586/14789450.1.1.97 [PubMed: 15966803] 
Fiser A, Sali A. Modeller: Generation and refinement of homology-based protein structure models. 
Methods Enzymol. 2003a; 374:461–491. DOI: 10.1016/S0076-6879(03)74020-8 [PubMed: 
14696385] 
Fiser A, Sali A. ModLoop: Automated modeling of loops in protein structures. Bioinformatics. 2003b; 
19:2500–2501. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btg362 [PubMed: 14668246] 
Fiser A, Do RKG, Sali A. Modeling of loops in protein structures. Protein Sci. 2000; 9:1753–1773. 
DOI: 10.1110/ps.9.9.1753 [PubMed: 11045621] 
Fiser A, Feig M, Brooks CL, Sali A. Evolution and physics in comparative protein structure modeling. 
Acc Chem Res. 2002; 35:413–421. DOI: 10.1021/ar010061h [PubMed: 12069626] 
Flicek P, Ahmed I, Amode MR, Barrell D, Beal K, Brent S, Carvalho-Silva D, Clapham P, Coates G, 
Fairley S, Fitzgerald S, Gil L, Garcia-Giron C, Gordon L, Hourlier T, Hunt S, Juettemann T, 
Kahari AK, Keenan S, Komorowska M, Kulesha E, Longden I, Maurel T, McLaren WM, Muffato 
M, Nag R, Overduin B, Pignatelli M, Pritchard B, Pritchard E, Riat HS, Ritchie GR, Ruffier M, 
Schuster M, Sheppard D, Sobral D, Taylor K, Thormann A, Trevanion S, White S, Wilder SP, 
Aken BL, Birney E, Cunningham F, Dunham I, Harrow J, Herrero J, Hubbard TJ, Johnson N, 
Kinsella R, Parker A, Spudich G, Yates A, Zadissa A, Searle SM. Ensembl 2013. Nucleic Acids 
Res. 2013; 41:D48–D55. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks1236 [PubMed: 23203987] 
Gao HX, Sengupta J, Valle M, Korostelev A, Eswar N, Stagg SM, Van Roey P, Agrawal RK, Harvey 
SC, Sali A, Chapman MS, Frank J. Study of the structural dynamics of the E-coli 70S ribosome 
using real-space refinement. Cell. 2003; 113:789–801. DOI: 10.1016/S0092-8674(03)00427-6 
[PubMed: 12809609] 
Godzik A. Fold recognition methods. Methods Biochem Anal. 2003; 44:525–546. [PubMed: 
12647403] 
Gough J, Karplus K, Hughey R, Chothia C. Assignment of homology to genome sequences using a 
library of hidden Markov models that represent all proteins of known structure. J Mol Biol. 2001; 
313:903–919. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.2001.5080 [PubMed: 11697912] 
Webb and Sali
Page 27
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Greer J. Comparative model-building of the mammalian serine proteases. J Mol Biol. 1981; 153:1027–
1042. DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(81)90465-4 [PubMed: 7045378] 
Gribskov M, McLachlan AD, Eisenberg D. Profile analysis: Detection of distantly related proteins. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1987; 84:4355–4358. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.84.13.4355 [PubMed: 
3474607] 
Guerler A, Knapp EW. Novel protein folds and their nonsequential structural analogs. Protein Sci. 
2008; 17:1374–1382. DOI: 10.1110/ps.035469.108 [PubMed: 18583523] 
Haas J, Roth S, Arnold K, Kiefer F, Schmidt T, Bordoli L, Schwede T. The Protein Model Portal–a 
comprehensive resource for protein structure and model information. Database (Oxford). 2013; 
2013:bat031.doi: 10.1093/database/bat031 [PubMed: 23624946] 
Havel TF, Snow ME. A new method for building protein conformations from sequence alignments 
with homologues of known structure. J Mol Biol. 1991; 217:1–7. DOI: 
10.1016/0022-2836(91)90603-4 [PubMed: 1988672] 
Henikoff S, Henikoff JG. Position-based sequence weights. J Mol Biol. 1994; 243:574–578. DOI: 
10.1016/0022-2836(94)90032-9 [PubMed: 7966282] 
Higo J, Collura V, Garnier J. Development of an extended simulated annealing method: Application to 
the modeling of complementary determining regions of immunoglobulins. Biopolymers. 1992; 
32:33–43. DOI: 10.1002/bip.360320106 [PubMed: 1617148] 
Holm L, Sander C. Database algorithm for generating protein backbone and side-chain co-ordinates 
from a C alpha trace application to model building and detection of co-ordinate errors. J Mol Biol. 
1991; 218:183–194. DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(91)90883-8 [PubMed: 2002501] 
Holm L, Kääriäinen S, Wilton C, Plewczynski D. Using Dali for structural comparison of proteins. 
Curr Protoc Bioinform. 2006; 14:5.5.1–5.5.24.
Hooft RW, Vriend G, Sander C, Abola EE. Errors in protein structures. Nature. 1996; 381:272.doi: 
10.1038/381272a0 [PubMed: 8692262] 
Howell PL, Almo SC, Parsons MR, Hajdu J, Petsko GA. Structure determination of turkey egg-white 
lysozyme using Laue diffraction data. Acta Crystallogr., B. 1992; 48:200–207. DOI: 10.1107/
S0108768191012466 [PubMed: 1515108] 
Huang H, Hu ZZ, Arighi CN, Wu CH. Integration of bioinformatics resources for functional analysis 
of gene expression and proteomic data. Front Biosci. 2007; 12:5071–5088. DOI: 10.2741/2449 
[PubMed: 17569631] 
Huang CC, Novak WR, Babbitt PC, Jewett AI, Ferrin TE, Klein TE. Integrated tools for structural and 
sequence alignment and analysis. Pac Symp Biocomput. 2000:230–241. [PubMed: 10902172] 
Hulo N, Bairoch A, Bulliard V, Cerutti L, De Castro E, Langendijk-Genevaux PS, Pagni M, Sigrist CJ. 
The PROSITE database. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006; 34:D227–D230. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkj063 
[PubMed: 16381852] 
Hunter S, Jones P, Mitchell A, Apweiler R, Attwood TK, Bateman A, Bernard T, Binns D, Bork P, 
Burge S, de Castro E, Coggill P, Corbett M, Das U, Daugherty L, Duquenne L, Finn RD, Fraser 
M, Gough J, Haft D, Hulo N, Kahn D, Kelly E, Letunic I, Lonsdale D, Lopez R, Madera M, 
Maslen J, McAnulla C, McDowall J, McMenamin C, Mi H, Mutowo-Muellenet P, Mulder N, 
Natale D, Orengo C, Pesseat S, Punta M, Quinn AF, Rivoire C, Sangrador-Vegas A, Selengut JD, 
Sigrist CJ, Scheremetjew M, Tate J, Thimmajanarthanan M, Thomas PD, Wu CH, Yeats C, Yong 
SY. InterPro in 2011: New developments in the family and domain prediction database. Nucleic 
Acids Res. 2012; 40:D306–D312. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkr948 [PubMed: 22096229] 
Hura GL, Menon AL, Hammel M, Rambo RP, Poole FL 2nd, Tsutakawa SE, Jenney FE Jr, Classen S, 
Frankel KA, Hopkins RC, Yang SJ, Scott JW, Dillard BD, Adams MW, Tainer JA. Robust, high-
throughput solution structural analyses by small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS). Nat Methods. 
2009; 6:606–612. DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.1353 [PubMed: 19620974] 
Jacobson MP, Pincus DL, Rapp CS, Day TJ, Honig B, Shaw DE, Friesner RA. A hierarchical approach 
to all-atom protein loop prediction. Proteins. 2004; 55:351–367. DOI: 10.1002/prot.10613 
[PubMed: 15048827] 
Jaroszewski L, Rychlewski L, Li Z, Li W, Godzik A. FFAS03: A server for profile–profile sequence 
alignments. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005; 33:W284–W288. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gki418 [PubMed: 
15980471] 
Webb and Sali
Page 28
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
John B, Sali A. Comparative protein structure modeling by iterative alignment, model building and 
model assessment. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003; 31:3982–3992. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkg460 [PubMed: 
12853614] 
Jones DT. GenTHREADER: An efficient and reliable protein fold recognition method for genomic 
sequences. J Mol Biol. 1999; 287:797–815. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1999.2583 [PubMed: 10191147] 
Jones DT. Evaluating the potential of using fold-recognition models for molecular replacement. Acta 
Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2001; 57:1428–1434. DOI: 10.1107/S0907444901013403 
[PubMed: 11567156] 
Jones TA, Thirup S. Using known substructures in protein model building and crystallography. EMBO 
J. 1986; 5:819–822. [PubMed: 3709525] 
Kabsch W, Sander C. On the use of sequence homologies to predict protein structure: Identical 
pentapeptides can have completely different conformations. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1984; 
81:1075–1078. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.81.4.1075 [PubMed: 6422466] 
Kallberg M, Wang H, Wang S, Peng J, Wang Z, Lu H, Xu J. Template-based protein structure 
modeling using the RaptorX web server. Nat Protoc. 2012; 7:1511–1522. DOI: 10.1038/nprot.
2012.085 [PubMed: 22814390] 
Kaplan W, Littlejohn TG. Swiss-PDB Viewer (Deep View). Brief Bioinformatics. 2001; 2:195–197. 
DOI: 10.1093/bib/2.2.195 [PubMed: 11465736] 
Karchin R, Cline M, Mandel-Gutfreund Y, Karplus K. Hidden Markov models that use predicted local 
structure for fold recognition: Alphabets of backbone geometry. Proteins. 2003; 51:504–514. DOI: 
10.1002/prot.10369 [PubMed: 12784210] 
Karchin R, Diekhans M, Kelly L, Thomas DJ, Pieper U, Eswar N, Haussler D, Sali A. LS-SNP: Large-
scale annotation of coding non-synonymous SNPs based on multiple information sources. 
Bioinformatics. 2005; 21:2814–2820. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bti442 [PubMed: 15827081] 
Karplus K. SAM-T08, HMM-based protein structure prediction. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009; 37:W492–
W497. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkp403 [PubMed: 19483096] 
Karplus K, Barrett C, Hughey R. Hidden Markov models for detecting remote protein homologies. 
Bioinformatics. 1998; 14:846–856. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/14.10.846 [PubMed: 9927713] 
Karplus K, Karchin R, Draper J, Casper J, Mandel-Gutfreund Y, Diekhans M, Hughey R. Combining 
local-structure, fold-recognition, and new fold methods for protein structure prediction. Proteins. 
2003; 53(Suppl 6):491–496. DOI: 10.1002/prot.10540 [PubMed: 14579338] 
Katoh K, Standley DM. MAFFT multiple sequence alignment software version 7: Improvements in 
performance and usability. Mol Biol Evol. 2013; 30:772–780. DOI: 10.1093/molbev/mst010 
[PubMed: 23329690] 
Kelley LA, Sternberg MJ. Protein structure prediction on the Web: A case study using the Phyre server. 
Nat Protoc. 2009; 4:363–371. DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2009.2 [PubMed: 19247286] 
Kelley LA, MacCallum RM, Sternberg MJ. Enhanced genome annotation using structural profiles in 
the program 3D-PSSM. J Mol Biol. 2000; 299:499–520. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.2000.3741 [PubMed: 
10860755] 
Khafizov K, Staritzbichler R, Stamm M, Forrest LR. A study of the evolution of inverted-topology 
repeats from LeuT-fold transporters using AlignMe. Biochemistry. 2010; 49:10702–10713. DOI: 
10.1021/bi101256x [PubMed: 21073167] 
Kiefer F, Arnold K, Kunzli M, Bordoli L, Schwede T. The SWISS-MODEL Repository and associated 
resources. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009; 37:D387–D392. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkn750 [PubMed: 
18931379] 
Koehl P, Delarue M. A self consistent mean field approach to simultaneous gap closure and side-chain 
positioning in homology modelling. Nat Struct Biol. 1995; 2:163–170. DOI: 10.1038/
nsb0295-163 [PubMed: 7538429] 
Konagurthu AS, Whisstock JC, Stuckey PJ, Lesk AM. MUSTANG: A multiple structural alignment 
algorithm. Proteins. 2006; 64:559–574. DOI: 10.1002/prot.20921 [PubMed: 16736488] 
Krivov GG, Shapovalov MV, Dunbrack RL Jr. Improved prediction of protein side-chain 
conformations with SCWRL4. Proteins. 2009; 77:778–795. DOI: 10.1002/prot.22488 [PubMed: 
19603484] 
Webb and Sali
Page 29
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Krogh A, Brown M, Mian IS, Sjolander K, Haussler D. Hidden Markov models in computational 
biology. Applications to protein modeling. J Mol Biol. 1994; 235:1501–1531. DOI: 10.1006/
jmbi.1994.1104 [PubMed: 8107089] 
Laskowski R, MacArthur M, Moss D, Thornton J. PROCHECK-a program to check the 
stereochemical quality of protein structures. J Appl Cryst. 1993; 26:283–291. DOI: 10.1107/
S0021889892009944
Lessel U, Schomburg D. Similarities between protein 3-D structures. Protein Eng. 1994; 7:1175–1187. 
DOI: 10.1093/protein/7.10.1175 [PubMed: 7855132] 
Letunic I, Doerks T, Bork P. SMART 7: Recent updates to the protein domain annotation resource. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 2012; 40:D302–D305. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkr931 [PubMed: 22053084] 
Levitt M. Accurate modeling of protein conformation by automatic segment matching. J Mol Biol. 
1992; 226:507–533. DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(92)90964-L [PubMed: 1640463] 
Li R, Chen X, Gong B, Selzer PM, Li Z, Davidson E, Kurzban G, Miller RE, Nuzum EO, McKerrow 
JH, Fletterick RJ, Gillmor SA, Craik CS, Kuntz ID, Cohen FE, Kenyon GL. Structure-based 
design of parasitic protease inhibitors. Bioorg Med Chem. 1996; 4:1421–1427. DOI: 
10.1016/0968-0896(96)00136-8 [PubMed: 8894100] 
Lin J, Qian J, Greenbaum D, Bertone P, Das R, Echols N, Senes A, Stenger B, Gerstein M. 
GeneCensus: Genome comparisons in terms of metabolic pathway activity and protein family 
sharing. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002; 30:4574–4582. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkf555 [PubMed: 
12384605] 
Lindahl E, Elofsson A. Identification of related proteins on family, superfamily and fold level. J Mol 
Biol. 2000; 295:613–625. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1999.3377 [PubMed: 10623551] 
Lupyan D, Leo-Macias A, Ortiz AR. A new progressive-iterative algorithm for multiple structure 
alignment. Bioinformatics. 2005; 21:3255–3263. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bti527 [PubMed: 
15941743] 
Luthy R, Bowie JU, Eisenberg D. Assessment of protein models with three-dimensional profiles. 
Nature. 1992; 356:83–85. DOI: 10.1038/356083a0 [PubMed: 1538787] 
MacKerell AD Jr, Bashford D, Bellott M, Dunbrack RL Jr, Evanseck JD, Field MJ, Fischer S, Gao J, 
Guo H, Ha S, Joseph-McCarthy D, Kuchnir L, Kuczera K, Lau FTK, Mattos C, Michnick S, Ngo 
T, Nguyen DT, Prodhom B, Reiher WE, Roux B, Schlenkrich M, Smith JC, Stote R, Straub J, 
Watanabe M, Wiorkiewicz-Kuczera J, Yin D, Karplus M. All-atom empirical potential for 
molecular modeling and dynamics studies of proteins. J Phys Chem B. 1998; 102:3586–3616. 
DOI: 10.1021/jp973084f [PubMed: 24889800] 
Madhusudhan MS, Marti-Renom MA, Sanchez R, Sali A. Variable gap penalty for protein sequence-
structure alignment. Protein Eng Des Sel. 2006; 19:129–133. DOI: 10.1093/protein/gzj005 
[PubMed: 16423846] 
Madhusudhan MS, Webb BM, Marti-Renom MA, Eswar N, Sali A. Alignment of multiple protein 
structures based on sequence and structure features. Protein Eng Des Sel. 2009; 22:569–574. 
DOI: 10.1093/protein/gzp040 [PubMed: 19587024] 
Mandell DJ, Coutsias EA, Kortemme T. Sub-angstrom accuracy in protein loop reconstruction by 
robotics-inspired conformational sampling. Nat Methods. 2009; 6:551–552. DOI: 10.1038/
nmeth0809-551 [PubMed: 19644455] 
Marti-Renom MA, Ilyin VA, Sali A. DBAli: A database of protein structure alignments. 
Bioinformatics. 2001; 17:746–747. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/17.8.746 [PubMed: 11524379] 
Marti-Renom MA, Madhusudhan MS, Sali A. Alignment of protein sequences by their profiles. 
Protein Sci. 2004; 13:1071–1087. DOI: 10.1110/ps.03379804 [PubMed: 15044736] 
Marti-Renom MA, Madhusudhan MS, Fiser A, Rost B, Sali A. Reliability of assessment of protein 
structure prediction methods. Structure. 2002; 10:435–440. DOI: 10.1016/
S0969-2126(02)00731-1 [PubMed: 12005441] 
Marti-Renom MA, Stuart AC, Fiser A, Sanchez R, Melo F, Sali A. Comparative protein structure 
modeling of genes and genomes. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct. 2000; 29:291–325. DOI: 
10.1146/annurev.biophys.29.1.291 [PubMed: 10940251] 
Matsumoto R, Sali A, Ghildyal N, Karplus M, Stevens RL. Packaging of proteases and proteoglycans 
in the granules of mast cells and other hematopoietic cells. A cluster of histidines on mouse mast 
Webb and Sali
Page 30
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
cell protease 7 regulates its binding to heparin serglycin proteoglycans. J Biol Chem. 1995; 
270:19524–19531. DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.33.19524 [PubMed: 7642636] 
McGuffin LJ, Jones DT. Improvement of the GenTHREADER method for genomic fold recognition. 
Bioinformatics. 2003; 19:874–881. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btg097 [PubMed: 12724298] 
McGuffin LJ, Bryson K, Jones DT. The PSIPRED protein structure prediction server. Bioinformatics. 
2000; 16:404–405. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/16.4.404 [PubMed: 10869041] 
Melo F, Feytmans E. Assessing protein structures with a non-local atomic interaction energy. J Mol 
Biol. 1998; 277:1141–1152. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1998.1665 [PubMed: 9571028] 
Melo F, Sali A. Fold assessment for comparative protein structure modeling. Protein Sci. 2007; 
16:2412–2426. DOI: 10.1110/ps.072895107 [PubMed: 17905832] 
Melo F, Sanchez R, Sali A. Statistical potentials for fold assessment. Protein Sci. 2002; 11:430–448. 
DOI: 10.1002/pro.110430 [PubMed: 11790853] 
Mezei M. Chameleon sequences in the PDB. Protein Eng. 1998; 11:411–414. DOI: 10.1093/protein/
11.6.411 [PubMed: 9725618] 
Mirkovic N, Marti-Renom MA, Weber BL, Sali A, Monteiro AN. Structure-based assessment of 
missense mutations in human BRCA1: Implications for breast and ovarian cancer predisposition. 
Cancer Res. 2004; 64:3790–3797. DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-03-3009 [PubMed: 15172985] 
Misura KM, Baker D. Progress and challenges in high-resolution refinement of protein structure 
models. Proteins. 2005; 59:15–29. DOI: 10.1002/prot.20376 [PubMed: 15690346] 
Misura KM, Chivian D, Rohl CA, Kim DE, Baker D. Physically realistic homology models built with 
ROSETTA can be more accurate than their templates. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2006; 103:5361–
5366. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0509355103 [PubMed: 16567638] 
Miwa JM, Ibanez-Tallon I, Crabtree GW, Sanchez R, Sali A, Role LW, Heintz N. lynx1, an 
endogenous toxin-like modulator of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the mammalian CNS. 
Neuron. 1999; 23:105–114. DOI: 10.1016/S0896-6273(00)80757-6 [PubMed: 10402197] 
Modi S, Paine MJ, Sutcliffe MJ, Lian LY, Primrose WU, Wolf CR, Roberts GC. A model for human 
cytochrome P450 2D6 based on homology modeling and NMR studies of substrate binding. 
Biochemistry. 1996; 35:4540–4550. DOI: 10.1021/bi952742o [PubMed: 8605204] 
Moult J. A decade of CASP: Progress, bottlenecks and prognosis in protein structure prediction. Curr 
Opin Struct Biol. 2005; 15:285–289. DOI: 10.1016/j.sbi.2005.05.011 [PubMed: 15939584] 
Moult J, James MN. An algorithm for determining the conformation of polypeptide segments in 
proteins by systematic search. Proteins. 1986; 1:146–163. DOI: 10.1002/prot.340010207 
[PubMed: 3130622] 
Moult J, Fidelis K, Zemla A, Hubbard T. Critical assessment of methods of protein structure prediction 
(CASP)-round V. Proteins. 2003; 53(Suppl 6):334–339. DOI: 10.1002/prot.10556 [PubMed: 
14579322] 
Moult J, Fidelis K, Kryshtafovych A, Rost B, Tramontano A. Critical assessment of methods of 
protein structure prediction—Round VIII. Proteins. 2009; 77(Suppl 9):1–4. DOI: 10.1002/prot.
22589 [PubMed: 19774620] 
Nagarajaram HA, Reddy BV, Blundell TL. Analysis and prediction of inter-strand packing distances 
between beta-sheets of globular proteins. Protein Eng. 1999; 12:1055–1062. DOI: 10.1093/
protein/12.12.1055 [PubMed: 10611399] 
Needleman SB, Wunsch CD. A general method applicable to the search for similarities in the amino 
acid sequence of two proteins. J Mol Biol. 1970; 48:443–453. DOI: 
10.1016/0022-2836(70)90057-4 [PubMed: 5420325] 
Notredame C. Computing multiple sequence/structure alignments with the T-coffee package. Curr 
Protoc Bioinformatics. 2010; 29:3.8.1–3.8.25. 3.8. DOI: 10.1002/0471250953.bi0308s04
Notredame C, Higgins DG, Heringa J. T-Coffee: A novel method for fast and accurate multiple 
sequence alignment. J Mol Biol. 2000; 302:205–217. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.2000.4042 [PubMed: 
10964570] 
Ohlson T, Wallner B, Elofsson A. Profile-profile methods provide improved fold-recognition: A study 
of different profile-profile alignment methods. Proteins. 2004; 57:188–197. DOI: 10.1002/prot.
20184 [PubMed: 15326603] 
Webb and Sali
Page 31
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Oliva B, Bates PA, Querol E, Aviles FX, Sternberg MJ. An automated classification of the structure of 
protein loops. J Mol Biol. 1997; 266:814–830. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1996.0819 [PubMed: 
9102471] 
Ortiz AR, Strauss CEM, Olmea O. MAMMOTH (matching molecular models obtained from theory): 
An automated method for model comparison. Protein Sci. 2002; 11:2606–2621. DOI: 
10.1110/ps.0215902 [PubMed: 12381844] 
Panchenko AR. Finding weak similarities between proteins by sequence profile comparison. Nucleic 
Acids Res. 2003; 31:683–689. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkg154 [PubMed: 12527777] 
Park J, Karplus K, Barrett C, Hughey R, Haussler D, Hubbard T, Chothia C. Sequence comparisons 
using multiple sequences detect three times as many remote homologues as pairwise methods. J 
Mol Biol. 1998; 284:1201–1210. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1998.2221 [PubMed: 9837738] 
Pawlowski K, Bierzynski A, Godzik A. Structural diversity in a family of homologous proteins. J Mol 
Biol. 1996; 258:349–366. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1996.0255 [PubMed: 8627631] 
Pearl F, Todd A, Sillitoe I, Dibley M, Redfern O, Lewis T, Bennett C, Marsden R, Grant A, Lee D, 
Akpor A, Maibaum M, Harrison A, Dallman T, Reeves G, Diboun I, Addou S, Lise S, Johnston 
C, Sillero A, Thornton J, Orengo C. The CATH Domain Structure Database and related resources 
Gene3D and DHS provide comprehensive domain family information for genome analysis. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 2005; 33:D247–D251. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gki024 [PubMed: 15608188] 
Pearson WR. Using the FASTA program to search protein and DNA sequence databases. Methods Mol 
Biol. 1994; 24:307–331. [PubMed: 8205202] 
Pearson WR. Flexible sequence similarity searching with the FASTA3 program package. Methods Mol 
Biol. 2000; 132:185–219. [PubMed: 10547837] 
Pegg SC, Brown SD, Ojha S, Seffernick J, Meng EC, Morris JH, Chang PJ, Huang CC, Ferrin TE, 
Babbitt PC. Leveraging enzyme structure-function relationships for functional inference and 
experimental design: The structure-function linkage database. Biochemistry. 2006; 45:2545–
2555. DOI: 10.1021/bi052101l [PubMed: 16489747] 
Pei J, Kim BH, Grishin NV. PROMALS3D: A tool for multiple protein sequence and structure 
alignments. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008; 36:2295–2300. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkn072 [PubMed: 
18287115] 
Petrey D, Honig B. Protein structure prediction: Inroads to biology. Mol Cell. 2005; 20:811–819. DOI: 
10.1016/j.molcel.2005.12.005 [PubMed: 16364908] 
Pieper U, Webb B, Dong GQ, Schneidman-Duhovny D, Fan H, Kim SJ, Khuri N, Spill Y, Weinkam P, 
Hammel M, Tainer J, Nilges M, Sali A. ModBase, a database of annotated comparative protein 
structure models, and associated resources. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014; 42:336–346. DOI: 
10.1093/nar/gkt1144
Pieper U, Webb BM, Barkan DT, Schneidman-Duhovny D, Schlessinger A, Braberg H, Yang Z, Meng 
EC, Pettersen EF, Huang CC, Datta RS, Sampathkumar P, Madhusudhan MS, Sjolander K, Ferrin 
TE, Burley SK, Sali A. ModBase, a database of annotated comparative protein structure models, 
and associated resources. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011; 39:465–474. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkq1091
Pietrokovski S. Searching databases of conserved sequence regions by aligning protein multiple-
alignments. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996; 24:3836–3845. DOI: 10.1093/nar/24.19.3836 [PubMed: 
8871566] 
Prlic A, Bliven S, Rose PW, Bluhm WF, Bizon C, Godzik A, Bourne PE. Pre-calculated protein 
structure alignments at the RCSB PDB website. Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:2983–2985. DOI: 
10.1093/bioinformatics/btq572 [PubMed: 20937596] 
Que X, Brinen LS, Perkins P, Herdman S, Hirata K, Torian BE, Rubin H, McKerrow JH, Reed SL. 
Cysteine proteinases from distinct cellular compartments are recruited to phagocytic vesicles by 
Entamoeba histolytica. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2002; 119:23–32. DOI: 10.1016/
S0166-6851(01)00387-5 [PubMed: 11755183] 
Ray A, Lindahl E, Wallner B. Improved model quality assessment using ProQ2. BMC Bioinformatics. 
2012; 13:224.doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-13-224 [PubMed: 22963006] 
Remmert M, Biegert A, Hauser A, Soding J. HHblits: Lightning-fast iterative protein sequence 
searching by HMM-HMM alignment. Nat Methods. 2012; 9:173–175. DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.1818 
[PubMed: 22198341] 
Webb and Sali
Page 32
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Ring CS, Kneller DG, Langridge R, Cohen FE. Taxonomy and conformational analysis of loops in 
proteins. J Mol Biol. 1992; 224:685–699. DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(92)90553-V [PubMed: 
1569550] 
Ring CS, Sun E, McKerrow JH, Lee GK, Rosenthal PJ, Kuntz ID, Cohen FE. Structure-based inhibitor 
design by using protein models for the development of antiparasitic agents. Proc Natl Acad Sci U 
S A. 1993; 90:3583–3587. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.90.8.3583 [PubMed: 8475107] 
Roche DB, Buenavista MT, Tetchner SJ, McGuffin LJ. The IntFOLD server: An integrated web 
resource for protein fold recognition, 3D model quality assessment, intrinsic disorder prediction, 
domain prediction and ligand binding site prediction. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011; 39:W171–176. 
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkr184 [PubMed: 21459847] 
Rost B. Twilight zone of protein sequence alignments. Protein Eng. 1999; 12:85–94. DOI: 10.1093/
protein/12.2.85 [PubMed: 10195279] 
Roy A, Kucukural A, Zhang Y. I-TASSER: A unified platform for automated protein structure and 
function prediction. Nat Protoc. 2010; 5:725–738. DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2010.5 [PubMed: 
20360767] 
Rufino SD, Donate LE, Canard LH, Blundell TL. Predicting the conformational class of short and 
medium size loops connecting regular secondary structures: Application to comparative 
modelling. J Mol Biol. 1997; 267:352–367. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1996.0851 [PubMed: 9096231] 
Rychlewski L, Zhang B, Godzik A. Fold and function predictions for Mycoplasma genitalium proteins. 
Fold Des. 1998; 3:229–238. DOI: 10.1016/S1359-0278(98)00034-0 [PubMed: 9710568] 
Sadreyev R, Grishin N. COMPASS: A tool for comparison of multiple protein alignments with 
assessment of statistical significance. J Mol Biol. 2003; 326:317–336. DOI: 10.1016/
S0022-2836(02)01371-2 [PubMed: 12547212] 
Sali A, Blundell TL. Comparative protein modelling by satisfaction of spatial restraints. J Mol Biol. 
1993; 234:779–815. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1993.1626 [PubMed: 8254673] 
Sali A, Overington JP. Derivation of rules for comparative protein modeling from a database of protein 
structure alignments. Protein Sci. 1994; 3:1582–1596. DOI: 10.1002/pro.5560030923 [PubMed: 
7833817] 
Samudrala R, Moult J. A graph-theoretic algorithm for comparative modeling of protein structure. J 
Mol Biol. 1998; 279:287–302. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1998.1689 [PubMed: 9636717] 
Sanchez R, Sali A. Advances in comparative protein-structure modelling. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 
1997a; 7:206–214. DOI: 10.1016/S0959-440X(97)80027-9 [PubMed: 9094331] 
Sanchez R, Sali A. Evaluation of comparative protein structure modeling by MODELLER-3. Proteins. 
1997b; (Suppl 1):50–58. [PubMed: 9485495] 
Sanchez R, Sali A. Large-scale protein structure modeling of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1998; 95:13597–13602. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.23.13597 [PubMed: 
9811845] 
Saqi MA, Russell RB, Sternberg MJ. Misleading local sequence alignments: Implications for 
comparative protein modelling. Protein Eng. 1998; 11:627–630. DOI: 10.1093/protein/11.8.627 
[PubMed: 9749915] 
Sauder JM, Arthur JW, Dunbrack RL Jr. Large-scale comparison of protein sequence alignment 
algorithms with structure alignments. Proteins. 2000; 40:6–22. DOI: 10.1002/
(SICI)1097-0134(20000701)40:1%3c6::AID-PROT30%3e3.0.CO;2-7 [PubMed: 10813826] 
Schneidman-Duhovny D, Hammel M, Sali A. FoXS: A web server for rapid computation and fitting of 
SAXS Profiles. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010; 38:541–544. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkq461
Schwarzenbacher R, Godzik A, Grzechnik SK, Jaroszewski L. The importance of alignment accuracy 
for molecular replacement. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2004; 60:1229–1236. DOI: 
10.1107/S0907444904010145 [PubMed: 15213384] 
Schwede T, Kopp J, Guex N, Peitsch MC. SWISS-MODEL: An automated protein homology-
modeling server. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003; 31:3381–3385. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkg520 [PubMed: 
12824332] 
Sellers BD, Zhu K, Zhao S, Friesner RA, Jacobson MP. Toward better refinement of comparative 
models: Predicting loops in inexact environments. Proteins. 2008; 72:959–971. DOI: 10.1002/
prot.21990 [PubMed: 18300241] 
Webb and Sali
Page 33
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Selzer PM, Chen X, Chan VJ, Cheng M, Kenyon GL, Kuntz ID, Sakanari JA, Cohen FE, McKerrow 
JH. Leishmania major: Molecular modeling of cysteine proteases and prediction of new 
nonpeptide inhibitors. Exp Parasitol. 1997; 87:212–221. DOI: 10.1006/expr.1997.4220 [PubMed: 
9371086] 
Shatsky M, Nussinov R, Wolfson HJ. A method for simultaneous alignment of multiple protein 
structures. Proteins. 2004; 56:143–156. DOI: 10.1002/prot.10628 [PubMed: 15162494] 
Shatsky M, Nussinov R, Wolfson HJ. Optimization of multiple-sequence alignment based on multiple-
structure alignment. Proteins. 2006; 62:209–217. DOI: 10.1002/prot.20665 [PubMed: 16294339] 
Shen MY, Sali A. Statistical potential for assessment and prediction of protein structures. Protein Sci. 
2006; 15:2507–2524. DOI: 10.1110/ps.062416606 [PubMed: 17075131] 
Sheng Y, Sali A, Herzog H, Lahnstein J, Krilis SA. Site-directed mutagenesis of recombinant human 
beta 2-glycoprotein I identifies a cluster of lysine residues that are critical for phospholipid 
binding and anti-cardiolipin antibody activity. J Immunol. 1996; 157:3744–3751. [PubMed: 
8871678] 
Shenkin PS, Yarmush DL, Fine RM, Wang HJ, Levinthal C. Predicting antibody hypervariable loop 
conformation. I Ensembles of random conformations for ringlike structures. Biopolymers. 1987; 
26:2053–2085. DOI: 10.1002/bip.360261207 [PubMed: 3435744] 
Shi J, Blundell TL, Mizuguchi K. FUGUE: Sequence-structure homology recognition using 
environment-specific substitution tables and structure-dependent gap penalties. J Mol Biol. 2001; 
310:243–257. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.2001.4762 [PubMed: 11419950] 
Sibanda BL, Blundell TL, Thornton JM. Conformation of beta-hairpins in protein structures. A 
systematic classification with applications to modelling by homology, electron density fitting and 
protein engineering. J Mol Biol. 1989; 206:759–777. DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(89)90583-4 
[PubMed: 2500530] 
Sippl MJ. Calculation of conformational ensembles from potentials of mean force. An approach to the 
knowledge-based prediction of local structures in globular proteins. J Mol Biol. 1990; 213:859–
883. DOI: 10.1016/S0022-2836(05)80269-4 [PubMed: 2359125] 
Sippl MJ. Recognition of errors in three-dimensional structures of proteins. Proteins. 1993; 17:355–
362. DOI: 10.1002/prot.340170404 [PubMed: 8108378] 
Sippl MJ. Knowledge-based potentials for proteins. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 1995; 5:229–235. DOI: 
10.1016/0959-440X(95)80081-6 [PubMed: 7648326] 
Skolnick J, Kihara D. Defrosting the frozen approximation: PROSPECTOR–a new approach to 
threading. Proteins. 2001; 42:319–331. DOI: 10.1002/1097-0134(20010215)42:3%3c319::AID-
PROT30%3e3.0.CO;2-A [PubMed: 11151004] 
Smith TF, Waterman MS. Identification of common molecular subsequences. J Mol Biol. 1981; 
147:195–197. DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(81)90087-5 [PubMed: 7265238] 
Soding J. Protein homology detection by HMM-HMM comparison. Bioinformatics. 2005; 21:951–
960. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bti125 [PubMed: 15531603] 
Soding J, Biegert A, Lupas AN. The HHpred interactive server for protein homology detection and 
structure prediction. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005; 33:W244–W248. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gki408 
[PubMed: 15980461] 
Song Y, Dimaio F, Wang RY, Kim D, Miles C, Brunette T, Thompson J, Baker D. High-Resolution 
Comparative Modeling with RosettaCM. Structure. 2013; 21:1735–1742. DOI: 10.1016/j.str.
2013.08.005 [PubMed: 24035711] 
Spahn CM, Beckmann R, Eswar N, Penczek PA, Sali A, Blobel G, Frank J. Structure of the 80S 
ribosome from Saccharomyces cerevisiae—tRNA-ribosome and subunit-subunit interactions. 
Cell. 2001; 107:373–386. DOI: 10.1016/S0092-8674(01)00539-6 [PubMed: 11701127] 
Srinivasan N, Blundell TL. An evaluation of the performance of an automated procedure for 
comparative modelling of protein tertiary structure. Protein Eng. 1993; 6:501–512. DOI: 
10.1093/protein/6.5.501 [PubMed: 8415577] 
Sutcliffe MJ, Dobson CM, Oswald RE. Solution structure of neuronal bungarotoxin determined by 
two-dimensional NMR spectroscopy: Calculation of tertiary structure using systematic 
homologous model building, dynamical simulated annealing, and restrained molecular dynamics. 
Biochemistry. 1992; 31:2962–2970. DOI: 10.1021/bi00126a017 [PubMed: 1550821] 
Webb and Sali
Page 34
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Sutcliffe MJ, Haneef I, Carney D, Blundell TL. Knowledge based modelling of homologous proteins, 
Part I: Three-dimensional frameworks derived from the simultaneous superposition of multiple 
structures. Protein Eng. 1987; 1:377–384. DOI: 10.1093/protein/1.5.377 [PubMed: 3508286] 
Taylor WR, Flores TP, Orengo CA. Multiple protein structure alignment. Protein Sci. 1994; 3:1858–
1870. DOI: 10.1002/pro.5560031025 [PubMed: 7849601] 
Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ. CLUSTAL W: Improving the sensitivity of progressive 
multiple sequence alignment through sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and 
weight matrix choice. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994; 22:4673–4680. DOI: 10.1093/nar/22.22.4673 
[PubMed: 7984417] 
Topham CM, Srinivasan N, Thorpe CJ, Overington JP, Kalsheker NA. Comparative modelling of major 
house dust mite allergen Der p I: Structure validation using an extended environmental amino 
acid propensity table. Protein Eng. 1994; 7:869–894. DOI: 10.1093/protein/7.7.869 [PubMed: 
7971950] 
Topham CM, McLeod A, Eisenmenger F, Overington JP, Johnson MS, Blundell TL. Fragment ranking 
in modelling of protein structure. Conformationally constrained environmental amino acid 
substitution tables. J Mol Biol. 1993; 229:194–220. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1993.1018 [PubMed: 
8421300] 
Unger R, Harel D, Wherland S, Sussman JL. A 3D building blocks approach to analyzing and 
predicting structure of proteins. Proteins. 1989; 5:355–373. DOI: 10.1002/prot.340050410 
[PubMed: 2798411] 
Vakser IA. Protein docking for low-resolution structures. Protein Eng. 1995; 8:371–377. DOI: 
10.1093/protein/8.4.371 [PubMed: 7567922] 
van Gelder CW, Leusen FJ, Leunissen JA, Noordik JH. A molecular dynamics approach for the 
generation of complete protein structures from limited coordinate data. Proteins. 1994; 18:174–
185. DOI: 10.1002/prot.340180209 [PubMed: 8159666] 
van Vlijmen HW, Karplus M. PDB-based protein loop prediction: Parameters for selection and 
methods for optimization. J Mol Biol. 1997; 267:975–1001. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1996.0857 
[PubMed: 9135125] 
Vernal J, Fiser A, Sali A, Muller M, Cazzulo JJ, Nowicki C. Probing the specificity of a trypanosomal 
aromatic alpha-hydroxy acid dehydrogenase by site-directed mutagenesis. Biochem Biophys Res 
Commun. 2002; 293:633–639. DOI: 10.1016/S0006-291X(02)00270-X [PubMed: 12054650] 
von Ohsen N, Sommer I, Zimmer R. Profile-profile alignment: A powerful tool for protein structure 
prediction. Pac Symp Biocomput. 2003:252–263. [PubMed: 12603033] 
Wang G, Dunbrack RL Jr. Scoring profile-to-profile sequence alignments. Protein Sci. 2004; 13:1612–
1626. DOI: 10.1110/ps.03601504 [PubMed: 15152092] 
Wang Q, Canutescu AA, Dunbrack RL Jr. SCWRL and MolIDE: Computer programs for side-chain 
conformation prediction and homology modeling. Nat Protoc. 2008; 3:1832–1847. DOI: 
10.1038/nprot.2008.184 [PubMed: 18989261] 
Weinkam P, Pons J, Sali A. Structure-based model of allostery predicts coupling between distant sites. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012; 109:4875–4880. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1116274109 [PubMed: 
22403063] 
Wiederstein M, Sippl MJ. ProSA-web: Interactive web service for the recognition of errors in three-
dimensional structures of proteins. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007; 35:W407–W410. DOI: 10.1093/nar/
gkm290 [PubMed: 17517781] 
Wolf E, Vassilev A, Makino Y, Sali A, Nakatani Y, Burley SK. Crystal structure of a GCN5-related N-
acetyltransferase: Serratia marcescens aminoglycoside 3-N-acetyltransferase. Cell. 1998; 
94:439–449. DOI: 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)81585-8 [PubMed: 9727487] 
Wu S, Zhang Y. MUSTER: Improving protein sequence profile-profile alignments by using multiple 
sources of structure information. Proteins. 2008; 72:547–556. DOI: 10.1002/prot.21945 
[PubMed: 18247410] 
Wu G, Fiser A, ter Kuile B, Sali A, Muller M. Convergent evolution of Trichomonas vaginalis lactate 
dehydrogenase from malate dehydrogenase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999; 96:6285–6290. 
DOI: 10.1073/pnas.96.11.6285 [PubMed: 10339579] 
Webb and Sali
Page 35
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Xiang Z, Soto CS, Honig B. Evaluating conformational free energies: The colony energy and its 
application to the problem of loop prediction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2002; 99:7432–7437. 
DOI: 10.1073/pnas.102179699 [PubMed: 12032300] 
Xu LZ, Sanchez R, Sali A, Heintz N. Ligand specificity of brain lipid-binding protein. J Biol Chem. 
1996; 271:24711–24719. DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.40.24711 [PubMed: 8798739] 
Xu J, Li M, Kim D, Xu Y. RAPTOR: Optimal protein threading by linear programming. J Bioinform 
Comput Biol. 2003; 1:95–117. DOI: 10.1142/S0219720003000186 [PubMed: 15290783] 
Yona G, Levitt M. Within the twilight zone: A sensitive profile-profile comparison tool based on 
information theory. J Mol Biol. 2002; 315:1257–1275. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.2001.5293 [PubMed: 
11827492] 
Zhang Y, Skolnick J. TM-align: A protein structure alignment algorithm based on the TM-score. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 2005; 33:2302–2309. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gki524 [PubMed: 15849316] 
Zheng Q, Rosenfeld R, Vajda S, DeLisi C. Determining protein loop conformation using scaling-
relaxation techniques. Protein Sci. 1993; 2:1242–1248. DOI: 10.1002/pro.5560020806 [PubMed: 
8401209] 
Zhou H, Zhou Y. Distance-scaled, finite ideal-gas reference state improves structure-derived potentials 
of mean force for structure selection and stability prediction. Protein Sci. 2002; 11:2714–2726. 
DOI: 10.1110/ps.0217002 [PubMed: 12381853] 
Zhou H, Zhou Y. Fold recognition by combining sequence profiles derived from evolution and from 
depth-dependent structural alignment of fragments. Proteins. 2005; 58:321–328. DOI: 10.1002/
prot.20308 [PubMed: 15523666] 
Zhu K, Pincus DL, Zhao S, Friesner RA. Long loop prediction using the protein local optimization 
program. Proteins. 2006; 65:438–452. DOI: 10.1002/prot.21040 [PubMed: 16927380] 
Internet Resources
http://salilab.org/modeller/Webb B, Madhusudhan MS, Shen M-Y, Dong GQ, Marti-Renom MA, 
Eswar N, Alber F, Topf M, Oliva B, Fiser A, Sanchez R, Yerkovich B, Badretdinov A, Melo F, 
Overington JP, Feyfant E, Sali A. MODELLER, A Protein Structure Modeling Program, Release 
9.15. 2015
http://salilab.org/modbase/Pieper U, Webb B, Dong GQ, Schneidman-Duhovny D, Fan H, Kim SJ, 
Khuri N, Spill YG, Weinkam P, Hammel M, Tainer JA, Nilges M, Sali A. MODBASE, a database 
of annotated comparative protein structure models. 2015
http://salilab.org/modeval/Eramian D, Shen M-Y, Melo F, Pieper U, Webb B, Eswar N, Sanchez R, Sali 
A. ModEval, a web server for evaluating protein structure models. 2015
http://salilab.org/modloop/Fiser A, Do R, Webb B, Pieper U, Sali A. ModLoop, a web server for 
modeling of loops in protein structures. 2003
http://salilab.org/allosmod/Weinkam P, Pons J, Webb B, Pieper U, Tjioe E, Sali A. AllosMod, a web 
server to set up and run simulations based on modeled energy landscapes. 2012
http://salilab.org/foxs/Schneidman-Duhovny D, Hammel M, Tainer J, Sali A. FoXS, a web server for 
fast SAXS profile computation with Debye formula. 2013
Webb and Sali
Page 36
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 5.6.1. 
Steps in comparative protein structure modeling. See text for details.
Webb and Sali
Page 37
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 5.6.2. 
File TvLDH.ali. Sequence file in PIR format.
Webb and Sali
Page 38
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 5.6.3. 
File build_profile.py. Input script file that searches for templates against a database of 
nonredundant PDB sequences.
Webb and Sali
Page 39
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 5.6.4. 
An excerpt from the file build_profile.prf. The aligned sequences have been removed 
for clarity.
Webb and Sali
Page 40
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 5.6.5. 
Script file compare.py.
Webb and Sali
Page 41
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 5.6.6. 
Excerpts from the log file compare.log.
Webb and Sali
Page 42
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 5.6.7. 
The script file align2d.py, used to align the target sequence against the template structure.
Webb and Sali
Page 43
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 5.6.8. 
The alignment between sequences TvLDH and 1bdmA, in the MODELLER PAP format. File 
TvLDH-1bmdA.pap.
Webb and Sali
Page 44
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 5.6.9. 
Script file, model-single.py, that generates five models.
Webb and Sali
Page 45
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 5.6.10. 
File evaluate_model.py, used to generate a pseudo-energy profile for a single model.
Webb and Sali
Page 46
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 5.6.11. 
A comparison of the pseudo-energy profiles of the model (red) and the template (green) 
structures.
Webb and Sali
Page 47
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 5.6.12. 
Excerpt of ModBase Sequence Overview page for TvLDH. For this sequence, coverage is 
shown (the fraction of the sequence for which a model is available, and its quality) together 
with any annotations available. In this case, the entire sequence was modeled with a good 
quality (>=30% sequence identity) template.
Webb and Sali
Page 48
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 5.6.13. 
Excerpt of ModBase Model Details page for TvLDH. Metadata about the model are shown 
on the left side of the page; these data include the part of the sequence that was modeled, the 
template used, the date when the modeling was performed, and a set of assessment scores. 
The actual 3-D models are shown on the right side of the page. The “Perform action on this 
model” menu allows for the models themselves or modeling alignments to be downloaded.
Webb and Sali
Page 49
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 5.6.14. 
Typical errors in comparative modeling. (A) Errors in side chain packing. The Trp 109 
residue in the crystal structure of mouse cellular retinoic acid binding protein I (red) is 
compared with its model (green). (B) Distortions and shifts in correctly aligned regions. A 
region in the crystal structure of mouse cellular retinoic acid binding protein I (red) is 
compared with its model (green) and with the template fatty acid binding protein (blue). (C) 
Errors in regions without a template. The Cα trace of the 112-117 loop is shown for the X-
ray structure of human eosinophil neurotoxin (red), its model (green), and the template 
ribonuclease A structure (residues 111-117; blue). (D) Errors due to misalignments. The N-
terminal region in the crystal structure of human eosinophil neurotoxin (red) is compared 
with its model (green). The corresponding region of the alignment with the template 
ribonuclease A is shown. The red lines show correct equivalences, that is, residues whose Cα 
atoms are within 5 Å of each other in the optimal least-squares superposition of the two X-
ray structures. The “a” characters in the bottom line indicate helical residues and “b” 
characters, the residues in sheets. (E) Errors due to an incorrect template. The X-ray 
structure of α-trichosanthin (red) is compared with its model (green) that was calculated 
using indole-3-glycerophosphate synthase as the template.
Webb and Sali
Page 50
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 5.6.15. 
Accuracy and application of protein structure models. The vertical axis indicates the 
different ranges of applicability of comparative protein structure modeling, the 
corresponding accuracy of protein structure models, and their sample applications. (A) The 
docosahexaenoic fatty acid ligand (violet) was docked into a high accuracy comparative 
model of brain lipid-binding protein (right), modeled based on its 62% sequence identity to 
the crystallographic structure of adipocyte lipid-binding protein (PDB code 1adl). A number 
of fatty acids were ranked for their affinity to brain lipid-binding protein consistently with 
site-directed mutagenesis and affinity chromatography experiments (Xu et al., 1996), even 
though the ligand specificity profile of this protein is different from that of the template 
structure. Typical overall accuracy of a comparative model in this range of sequence 
similarity is indicated by a comparison of a model for adipocyte fatty acid binding protein 
with its actual structure (left). (B) A putative proteoglycan binding patch was identified on a 
medium-accuracy comparative model of mouse mast cell protease 7 (right), modeled based 
on its 39% sequence identity to the crystallographic structure of bovine pancreatic trypsin 
(2ptn) that does not bind proteoglycans. The prediction was confirmed by site-directed 
mutagenesis and heparin-affinity chromatography experiments (Matsumoto et al., 1995). 
Typical accuracy of a comparative model in this range of sequence similarity is indicated by 
a comparison of a trypsin model with the actual structure. (C) A molecular model of the 
whole yeast ribosome (right) was calculated by fitting atomic rRNA and protein models into 
Webb and Sali
Page 51
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
the electron density of the 80S ribosomal particle, obtained by electron microscopy at 15 Å 
resolution (Spahn et al., 2001). Most of the models for 40 out of the 75 ribosomal proteins 
were based on template structures that were approximately 30% sequentially identical. 
Typical accuracy of a comparative model in this range of sequence similarity is indicated by 
a comparison of a model for a domain in L2 protein from B. stearothermophilus with the 
actual structure (1rl2).
Webb and Sali
Page 52
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Webb and Sali
Page 53
Table 5.6.1
Programs and Web Servers Useful in Comparative Protein Structure Modeling
Name
URL
Databases
Protein Sequence Databases
Ensembl (Flicek et al., 2013)
http://www.ensembl.org
GENBANK (Benson et al., 2013)
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genbank/
Protein Information Resource (Huang et al., 2007)
http://pir.georgetown.edu/
UniprotKB (Bairoch et al., 2005)
http://www.uniprot.org
Domains and Superfamilies
CATH/Gene3D (Pearl et al., 2005)
http://www.cathdb.info
InterPro (Hunter et al., 2012)
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/
MEME (Bailey and Elkan, 1994)
http://meme.nbcr.net/meme/
PFAM (Bateman et al., 2004)
http://pfam.sanger.ac.uk/
PRINTS (Attwood et al., 2012)
http://www.bioinf.manchester.ac.uk/dbbrowser/PRINTS/index.php
ProDom (Bru et al., 2005)
http://prodom.prabi.fr
ProSite (Hulo et al., 2006)
http://prosite.expasy.org/
SCOP (Andreeva et al., 2004)
http://scop.mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk/scop/
SFLD (Brown and Babbitt, 2012)
http://sfld.rbvi.ucsf.edu/
SMART (Letunic et al., 2012)
http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/
SUPERFAMILY (Gough et al., 2001)
http://supfam.cs.bris.ac.uk/SUPERFAMILY/
Protein Structures and Models
ModBase (Pieper et al., 2011)
http://salilab.org/modbase/
PDB (Berman et al., 2000)
http://www.pdb.org/
Protein Model Portal (Arnold et al., 2009; Haas et al., 
2013)
http://www.proteinmodelportal.org/
SwissModel Repository (Kiefer et al., 2009)
http://swissmodel.expasy.org/repository/
Miscellaneous
DBALI (Marti-Renom et al., 2001)
http://salilab.org/dbali
GENECENSUS (Lin et al., 2002)
http://bioinfo.mbb.yale.edu/genome/
Alignment
Sequence and structure based sequence alignment
AlignMe (Khafizov et al., 2010)
http://www.bioinfo.mpg.de/AlignMe/
CLUSTALW (Thompson et al., 1994)
http://www2.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw/
COMPASS (Sadreyev and Grishin, 2003)
ftp://iole.swmed.edu/pub/compass/
EXPRESSO (Armougom et al., 2006)
http://igs-server.cnrs-mrs.fr/Tcoffee/tcoffee_cgi/index.cgi
FastA (Pearson, 2000)
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/sss/fasta/
FFAS03 (Jaroszewski et al., 2005)
http://ffas.burnham.org/
FUGUE (Shi et al., 2001)
http://www-cryst.bioc.cam.ac.uk/fugue
GENTHREADER (Jones, 1999; McGuffin and Jones, 
2003)
http://bioinf.cs.ucl.ac.uk/psipred/
HHBlits/HHsearch (Remmert et al., 2012)
http://toolkit.lmb.uni-muenchen.de/hhsuite
MAFFT (Katoh and Standley, 2013)
http://mafft.cbrc.jp/alignment/software/
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Webb and Sali
Page 54
Name
URL
MUSCLE (Edgar, 2004)
http://www.drive5.com/muscle
MUSTER (Wu and Zhang, 2008)
http://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/MUSTER
PROMALS3D (Pei et al., 2008)
http://prodata.swmed.edu/promals3d/promals3d.php
PSI-BLAST (Altschul et al., 1997)
http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi
PSIPRED (McGuffin et al., 2000)
http://bioinf.cs.ucl.ac.uk/psipred/
SALIGN (Eswar et al., 2003)
http://salilab.org/salign/
SAM-T08 (Karplus et al., 2003; Karplus, 2009)
http://compbio.soe.ucsc.edu/HMM-apps/
Staccato (Shatsky et al., 2006)
http://bioinfo3d.cs.tau.ac.il/staccato/
T-Coffee (Notredame et al., 2000; Notredame, 2010)
http://www.tcoffee.org/
Structure
CE (Prlic et al., 2010)
http://source.rcsb.org/jfatcatserver/ceHome.jsp
GANGSTA+ (Guerler and Knapp, 2008)
http://agknapp.chemie.fu-berlin.de/gplus/index.php
HHsearch (Soding, 2005)
ftp://toolkit.lmb.uni-muenchen.de/hhsearch/
Mammoth (Ortiz et al., 2002)
http://ub.cbm.uam.es/software/mammoth.php
Mammoth-mult (Lupyan et al., 2005)
http://ub.cbm.uam.es/software/mammothm.php
MASS (Dror et al., 2003)
http://bioinfo3d.cs.tau.ac.il/MASS/
MultiProt (Shatsky et al., 2004)
http://bioinfo3d.cs.tau.ac.il/MultiProt
MUSTANG (Konagurthu et al., 2006)
http://www.csse.monash.edu.au/~karun/Site/mustang.html
PDBeFold (Dietmann et al., 2001)
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/msd-srv/ssm/
SALIGN (Eswar et al., 2003)
http://salilab.org/salign/
TM-align (Zhang and Skolnick, 2005)
http://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/TM-align/
Alignment modules in molecular graphics programs
Discovery Studio
http://www.accelrys.com
PyMol
http://www.pymol.org/
Swiss-PDB Viewer (Kaplan and Littlejohn, 2001)
http://spdbv.vital-it.ch/
UCSF Chimera (Huang et al., 2000)
http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera
Comparative Modeling, Threading, and Refinement
Web servers
3d-jigsaw (Bates et al., 2001)
http://www.bmm.icnet.uk/servers/3djigsaw/
HHPred (Soding et al., 2005)
http://toolkit.genzentrum.lmu.de/hhpred
IntFold (Roche et al., 2011)
http://www.reading.ac.uk/bioinf/IntFOLD/
i-TASSER (Roy et al., 2010)
http://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/I-TASSER/
M4T (Fernandez-Fuentes et al., 2007)
http://manaslu.aecom.yu.edu/M4T/
ModWeb (Eswar et al., 2003)
http://salilab.org/modweb/
Phyre2 (Kelley and Sternberg, 2009)
http://www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk/phyre2
RaptorX (Kallberg et al., 2012)
http://raptorx.uchicago.edu/
Robetta (Song et al., 2013)
http://robetta.bakerlab.org/
SWISS-MODEL (Schwede et al., 2003)
http://www.expasy.org/swissmod
Programs
HHsuite (Soding, 2005)
ftp://toolkit.genzentrum.lmu.de/pub/HH-suite/
Modeller (Sali and Blundell, 1993)
http://salilab.org/modeller/
MolIDE (Wang et al., 2008)
http://dunbrack.fccc.edu/molide/
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Webb and Sali
Page 55
Name
URL
Rosetta@home
http://boinc.bakerlab.org/rosetta/
RosettaCM (Song et al., 2013)
https://www.rosettacommons.org/home
SCWRL (Krivov et al., 2009)
http://dunbrack.fccc.edu/scwrl4/SCWRL4.php
Quality estimation
ANOLEA (Melo and Feytmans, 1998)
http://melolab.org/anolea/index.html
ERRAT (Colovos and Yeates, 1993)
http://nihserver.mbi.ucla.edu/ERRAT/
ModEval
http://salilab.org/modeval/
ProQ2 (Ray et al., 2012)
http://proq2.theophys.kth.se/
PROCHECK (Laskowski et al., 1993)
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/thornton-srv/software/PROCHECK/
Prosa2003 (Sippl, 1993; Wiederstein and Sippl, 2007)
http://www.came.sbg.ac.at
QMEAN local (Benkert et al., 2011)
http://www.openstructure.org/download/
SwissModel Workspace (Arnold et al., 2006)
http://swissmodel.expasy.org/workspace/index.php?func=tools_structureassessment1
VERIFY3D (Luthy et al., 1992)
http://www.doe-mbi.ucla.edu/Services/Verify_3D/
WHATCHECK (Hooft et al., 1996)
http://www.cmbi.kun.nl/gv/whatcheck/
Methods evaluation
CAMEO (Haas et al.)
http://cameo3d.org/
CASP (Moult et al., 2003)
http://predictioncenter.llnl.gov
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 20.
